CONTENTS
PART 1--The Tragedy of Birlstone
Chapter
1 The Warning 2 Sherlock Holmes Discourses 3 The Tragedy of Birlstone 4 Darkness 5 The People Of the Drama 6 A Dawning Light 7 The Solution
PART 2--The Scowrers
1 The Man 2 The Bodymaster 3 Lodge 341, Vermissa 4 The Valley of Fear 5 The Darkest Hour 6 Danger 7 The Trapping of Birdy Edwards
PART 1
The Tragedy of Birlstone
Chapter 1
The Warning
"I am inclined to think--" said I.
"I should do so," Sherlock Holmes remarked impatiently.
I believe that I am one of the most long-suffering of mortals; but I'lladmit that I was annoyed at the sardonic interruption.
"Really, Holmes," said I severely, "you are a little trying at times."
He was too much absorbed with his own thoughts to give any immediateanswer to my remonstrance. He leaned upon his hand, with his untastedbreakfast before him, and he stared at the slip of paper which he hadjust drawn from its envelope. Then he took the envelope itself, held itup to the light, and very carefully studied both the exterior and theflap.
"It is Porlock's writing," said he thoughtfully. "I can hardly doubtthat it is Porlock's writing, though I have seen it only twice before.The Greek e with the peculiar top flourish is distinctive. But if it isPorlock, then it must be something of the very first importance."
He was speaking to himself rather than to me; but my vexationdisappeared in the interest which the words awakened.
"Who then is Porlock?" I asked.
"Porlock, Watson, is a nom-de-plume, a mere identification mark; butbehind it lies a shifty and evasive personality. In a former letter hefrankly informed me that the name was not his own, and defied me everto trace him among the teeming millions of this great city. Porlock isimportant, not for himself, but for the great man with whom he is intouch. Picture to yourself the pilot fish with the shark, the jackalwith the lion--anything that is insignificant in companionship withwhat is formidable: not only formidable, Watson, but sinister--in thehighest degree sinister. That is where he comes within my purview. Youhave heard me speak of Professor Moriarty?"
"The famous scientific criminal, as famous among crooks as--"
"My blushes, Watson!" Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice.
"I was about to say, as he is unknown to the public."
"A touch! A distinct touch!" cried Holmes. "You are developing acertain unexpected vein of pawky humour, Watson, against which I mustlearn to guard myself. But in calling Moriarty a criminal you areuttering libel in the eyes of the law--and there lie the glory and thewonder of it! The greatest schemer of all time, the organizer of everydeviltry, the controlling brain of the underworld, a brain which mighthave made or marred the destiny of nations--that's the man! But soaloof is he from general suspicion, so immune from criticism, soadmirable in his management and self-effacement, that for those verywords that you have uttered he could hale you to a court and emergewith your year's pension as a solatium for his wounded character. Is henot the celebrated author of The Dynamics of an Asteroid, a book whichascends to such rarefied heights of pure mathematics that it is saidthat there was no man in the scientific press capable of criticizingit? Is this a man to traduce? Foul-mouthed doctor and slanderedprofessor--such would be your respective roles! That's genius, Watson.But if I am spared by lesser men, our day will surely come."
"May I be there to see!" I exclaimed devoutly. "But you were speakingof this man Porlock."
"Ah, yes--the so-called Porlock is a link in the chain some little wayfrom its great attachment. Porlock is not quite a sound link--betweenourselves. He is the only flaw in that chain so far as I have been ableto test it."
"But no chain is stronger than its weakest link."
"Exactly, my dear Watson! Hence the extreme importance of Porlock. Ledon by some rudimentary aspirations towards right, and encouraged by thejudicious stimulation of an occasional ten-pound note sent to him bydevious methods, he has once or twice given me advance informationwhich has been of value--that highest value which anticipates andprevents rather than avenges crime. I cannot doubt that, if we had thecipher, we should find that this communication is of the nature that Iindicate."
Again Holmes flattened out the paper upon his unused plate. I rose and,leaning over him, stared down at the curious inscription, which ran asfollows:
534 C2    13 127 36 31   4  17   21 41
DOUGLAS 109 293  5  37   BIRLSTONE
26   BIRLSTONE 9   47     171
"What do you make of it, Holmes?"
"It is obviously an attempt to convey secret information."
"But what is the use of a cipher message without the cipher?"
"In this instance, none at all."
"Why do you say 'in this instance'?"
"Because there are many ciphers which I would read as easily as I dothe apocrypha of the agony column: such crude devices amuse theintelligence without fatiguing it. But this is different. It is clearlya reference to the words in a page of some book. Until I am told whichpage and which book I am powerless."
"But why 'Douglas' and 'Birlstone'?"
"Clearly because those are words which were not contained in the pagein question."
"Then why has he not indicated the book?"
"Your native shrewdness, my dear Watson, that innate cunning which isthe delight of your friends, would surely prevent you from inclosingcipher and message in the same envelope. Should it miscarry, you areundone. As it is, both have to go wrong before any harm comes from it.Our second post is now overdue, and I shall be surprised if it does notbring us either a further letter of explanation, or, as is moreprobable, the very volume to which these figures refer."
Holmes's calculation was fulfilled within a very few minutes by theappearance of Billy, the page, with the very letter which we wereexpecting.
"The same writing," remarked Holmes, as he opened the envelope, "andactually signed," he added in an exultant voice as he unfolded theepistle. "Come, we are getting on, Watson." His brow clouded, however,as he glanced over the contents.
"Dear me, this is very disappointing! I fear, Watson, that all ourexpectations come to nothing. I trust that the man Porlock will come tono harm.
"DEAR MR. HOLMES [he says]:
"I will go no further in this matter. It is too dangerous--he  suspects me. I can see that he suspects me. He came to me  quite unexpectedly after I had actually addressed this envelope  with the intention of sending you the key to the cipher.  I was able to cover it up. If he had seen it, it would have  gone hard with me. But I read suspicion in his eyes. Please  burn the cipher message, which can now be of no use to you.
FRED PORLOCK."
Holmes sat for some little time twisting this letter between hisfingers, and frowning, as he stared into the fire.
"After all," he said at last, "there may be nothing in it. It may beonly his guilty conscience. Knowing himself to be a traitor, he mayhave read the accusation in the other's eyes."
"The other being, I presume, Professor Moriarty."
"No less! When any of that party talk about 'He' you know whom theymean. There is one predominant 'He' for all of them."
"But what can he do?"
"Hum! That's a large question. When you have one of the first brains ofEurope up against you, and all the powers of darkness at his back,there are infinite possibilities. Anyhow, Friend Porlock is evidentlyscared out of his senses--
kindly compare the writing in the note tothat upon its envelope; which was done, he tells us, before thisill-omened visit. The one is clear and firm. The other hardly legible."
"Why did he write at all? Why did he not simply drop it?"
"Because he feared I would make some inquiry after him in that case,and possibly bring trouble on him."
"No doubt," said I. "Of course." I had picked up the original ciphermessage and was bending my brows over it. "It's pretty maddening tothink that an important secret may lie here on this slip of paper, andthat it is beyond human power to penetrate it."
Sherlock Holmes had pushed away his untasted breakfast and lit theunsavoury pipe which was the companion of his deepest meditations. "Iwonder!" said he, leaning back and staring at the ceiling. "Perhapsthere are points which have escaped your Machiavellian intellect. Letus consider the problem in the light of pure reason. This man'sreference is to a book. That is our point of departure."
"A somewhat vague one."
"Let us see then if we can narrow it down. As I focus my mind upon it,it seems rather less impenetrable. What indications have we as to thisbook?"
"None."
"Well, well, it is surely not quite so bad as that. The cipher messagebegins with a large 534, does it not? We may take it as a workinghypothesis that 534 is the particular page to which the cipher refers.So our book has already become a large book which is surely somethinggained. What other indications have we as to the nature of this largebook? The next sign is C2. What do you make of that, Watson?"
"Chapter the second, no doubt."
"Hardly that, Watson. You will, I am sure, agree with me that if thepage be given, the number of the chapter is immaterial. Also that ifpage 534 finds us only in the second chapter, the length of the firstone must have been really intolerable."
"Column!" I cried.
"Brilliant, Watson. You are scintillating this morning. If it is notcolumn, then I am very much deceived. So now, you see, we begin tovisualize a large book printed in double columns which are each of aconsiderable length, since one of the words is numbered in the documentas the two hundred and ninety-third. Have we reached the limits of whatreason can supply?"
"I fear that we have."
"Surely you do yourself an injustice. One more coruscation, my dearWatson--yet another brain-wave! Had the volume been an unusual one, hewould have sent it to me. Instead of that, he had intended, before hisplans were nipped, to send me the clue in this envelope. He says so inhis note. This would seem to indicate that the book is one which hethought I would have no difficulty in finding for myself. He hadit--and he imagined that I would have it, too. In short, Watson, it isa very common book."
"What you say certainly sounds plausible."
"So we have contracted our field of search to a large book, printed indouble columns and in common use."
"The Bible!" I cried triumphantly.
"Good, Watson, good! But not, if I may say so, quite good enough! Evenif I accepted the compliment for myself I could hardly name any volumewhich would be less likely to lie at the elbow of one of Moriarty'sassociates. Besides, the editions of Holy Writ are so numerous that hecould hardly suppose that two copies would have the same pagination.This is clearly a book which is standardized. He knows for certain thathis page 534 will exactly agree with my page 534."
"But very few books would correspond with that."
"Exactly. Therein lies our salvation. Our search is narrowed down tostandardized books which anyone may be supposed to possess."
"Bradshaw!"
"There are difficulties, Watson. The vocabulary of Bradshaw is nervousand terse, but limited. The selection of words would hardly lend itselfto the sending of general messages. We will eliminate Bradshaw. Thedictionary is, I fear, inadmissible for the same reason. What then isleft?"
"An almanac!"
"Excellent, Watson! I am very much mistaken if you have not touched thespot. An almanac! Let us consider the claims of Whitaker's Almanac. Itis in common use. It has the requisite number of pages. It is in doublecolumn. Though reserved in its earlier vocabulary, it becomes, if Iremember right, quite garrulous towards the end." He picked the volumefrom his desk. "Here is page 534, column two, a substantial block ofprint dealing, I perceive, with the trade and resources of BritishIndia. Jot down the words, Watson! Number thirteen is 'Mahratta.' Not,I fear, a very auspicious beginning. Number one hundred andtwenty-seven is 'Government'; which at least makes sense, thoughsomewhat irrelevant to ourselves and Professor Moriarty. Now let us tryagain. What does the Mahratta government do? Alas! the next word is'pig's-bristles.' We are undone, my good Watson! It is finished!"
He had spoken in jesting vein, but the twitching of his bushy eyebrowsbespoke his disappointment and irritation. I sat helpless and unhappy,staring into the fire. A long silence was broken by a suddenexclamation from Holmes, who dashed at a cupboard, from which heemerged with a second yellow-covered volume in his hand.
"We pay the price, Watson, for being too up-to-date!" he cried. "We arebefore our time, and suffer the usual penalties. Being the seventh ofJanuary, we have very properly laid in the new almanac. It is more thanlikely that Porlock took his message from the old one. No doubt hewould have told us so had his letter of explanation been written. Nowlet us see what page 534 has in store for us. Number thirteen is'There,' which is much more promising. Number one hundred andtwenty-seven is 'is'--'There is'"--Holmes's eyes were gleaming withexcitement, and his thin, nervous fingers twitched as he counted thewords--"'danger.' Ha! Ha! Capital! Put that down, Watson. 'There isdanger--may--come--very--soon--one.' Then we have the name 'Douglas'--'rich--country--now--at--Birlstone--House--Birlstone--confidence--is--pressing.' There, Watson! What do you think of pure reason and itsfruit? If the greengrocer had such a thing as a laurel wreath, Ishould send Billy round for it."
I was staring at the strange message which I had scrawled, as hedeciphered it, upon a sheet of foolscap on my knee.
"What a queer, scrambling way of expressing his meaning!" said I.
"On the contrary, he has done quite remarkably well," said Holmes."When you search a single column for words with which to express yourmeaning, you can hardly expect to get everything you want. You arebound to leave something to the intelligence of your correspondent. Thepurport is perfectly clear. Some deviltry is intended against oneDouglas, whoever he may be, residing as stated, a rich countrygentleman. He is sure--'confidence' was as near as he could get to'confident'--that it is pressing. There is our result--and a veryworkmanlike little bit of analysis it was!"
Holmes had the impersonal joy of the true artist in his better work,even as he mourned darkly when it fell below the high level to which heaspired. He was still chuckling over his success when Billy swung openthe door and Inspector MacDonald of Scotland Yard was ushered into theroom.
Those were the early days at the end of the '80's, when Alec MacDonaldwas far from having attained the national fame which he has nowachieved. He was a young but trusted member of the detective force, whohad distinguished himself in several cases which had been entrusted tohim. His tall, bony figure gave promise of exceptional physicalstrength, while his great cranium and deep-set, lustrous eyes spoke noless clearly of the keen intelligence which twinkled out from behindhis bushy eyebrows. He was a silent, precise man with a dour nature anda hard Aberdonian accent.
Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success,his own sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem. For thisreason the affection and respect of the Scotchman for his amateurcolleague were profound, and he showed them by the frankness with whichhe consulted Holmes in every difficulty. Mediocrity knows nothinghigher than itself; but talent instantly recognizes genius, andMacDonald had talent enough for his profession to enable him toperceive that there was no humiliation in seeking the assistance of onewho already stood alone in Europe, both in his gifts and in hisexperience. Holmes was not prone to friendship, but he was tolerant ofthe big Scotchman, and smiled at the sight of
him.
"You are an early bird, Mr. Mac," said he. "I wish you luck with yourworm. I fear this means that there is some mischief afoot."
"If you said 'hope' instead of 'fear,' it would be nearer the truth,I'm thinking, Mr. Holmes," the inspector answered, with a knowing grin."Well, maybe a wee nip would keep out the raw morning chill. No, Iwon't smoke, I thank you. I'll have to be pushing on my way; for theearly hours of a case are the precious ones, as no man knows betterthan your own self. But--but--"
The inspector had stopped suddenly, and was staring with a look ofabsolute amazement at a paper upon the table. It was the sheet uponwhich I had scrawled the enigmatic message.
"Douglas!" he stammered. "Birlstone! What's this, Mr. Holmes? Man, it'switchcraft! Where in the name of all that is wonderful did you getthose names?"
"It is a cipher that Dr. Watson and I have had occasion to solve. Butwhy--what's amiss with the names?"
The inspector looked from one to the other of us in dazed astonishment."Just this," said he, "that Mr. Douglas of Birlstone Manor House washorribly murdered last night!"
Chapter 2
Sherlock Holmes Discourses
It was one of those dramatic moments for which my friend existed. Itwould be an overstatement to say that he was shocked or even excited bythe amazing announcement. Without having a tinge of cruelty in hissingular composition, he was undoubtedly callous from longover-stimulation. Yet, if his emotions were dulled, his intellectualperceptions were exceedingly active. There was no trace then of thehorror which I had myself felt at this curt declaration; but his faceshowed rather the quiet and interested composure of the chemist whosees the crystals falling into position from his oversaturated solution.
"Remarkable!" said he. "Remarkable!"
"You don't seem surprised."
"Interested, Mr. Mac, but hardly surprised. Why should I be surprised?I receive an anonymous communication from a quarter which I know to beimportant, warning me that danger threatens a certain person. Within anhour I learn that this danger has actually materialized and that theperson is dead. I am interested; but, as you observe, I am notsurprised."
In a few short sentences he explained to the inspector the facts aboutthe letter and the cipher. MacDonald sat with his chin on his hands andhis great sandy eyebrows bunched into a yellow tangle.
"I was going down to Birlstone this morning," said he. "I had come toask you if you cared to come with me--you and your friend here. Butfrom what you say we might perhaps be doing better work in London."
"I rather think not," said Holmes.
"Hang it all, Mr. Holmes!" cried the inspector. "The papers will befull of the Birlstone mystery in a day or two; but where's the mysteryif there is a man in London who prophesied the crime before ever itoccurred? We have only to lay our hands on that man, and the rest willfollow."
"No doubt, Mr. Mac. But how do you propose to lay your hands on theso-called Porlock?"
MacDonald turned over the letter which Holmes had handed him. "Postedin Camberwell--that doesn't help us much. Name, you say, is assumed.Not much to go on, certainly. Didn't you say that you have sent himmoney?"
"Twice."
"And how?"
"In notes to Camberwell post-office."
"Did you ever trouble to see who called for them?"
"No."
The inspector looked surprised and a little shocked. "Why not?"
"Because I always keep faith. I had promised when he first wrote that Iwould not try to trace him."
"You think there is someone behind him?"
"I know there is."
"This professor that I've heard you mention?"
"Exactly!"
Inspector MacDonald smiled, and his eyelid quivered as he glancedtowards me. "I won't conceal from you, Mr. Holmes, that we think in theC. I. D. that you have a wee bit of a bee in your bonnet over thisprofessor. I made some inquiries myself about the matter. He seems tobe a very respectable, learned, and talented sort of man."
"I'm glad you've got so far as to recognize the talent."
"Man, you can't but recognize it! After I heard your view I made it mybusiness to see him. I had a chat with him on eclipses. How the talkgot that way I canna think; but he had out a reflector lantern and aglobe, and made it all clear in a minute. He lent me a book; but Idon't mind saying that it was a bit above my head, though I had a goodAberdeen upbringing. He'd have made a grand meenister with his thinface and gray hair and solemn-like way of talking. When he put his handon my shoulder as we were parting, it was like a father's blessingbefore you go out into the cold, cruel world."
Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "Great!" he said. "Great! Tellme, Friend MacDonald, this pleasing and touching interview was, Isuppose, in the professor's study?"
"That's so."
"A fine room, is it not?"
"Very fine--very handsome indeed, Mr. Holmes."
"You sat in front of his writing desk?"
"Just so."
"Sun in your eyes and his face in the shadow?"
"Well, it was evening; but I mind that the lamp was turned on my face."
"It would be. Did you happen to observe a picture over the professor'shead?"
"I don't miss much, Mr. Holmes. Maybe I learned that from you. Yes, Isaw the picture--a young woman with her head on her hands, peeping atyou sideways."
"That painting was by Jean Baptiste Greuze."
The inspector endeavoured to look interested.
"Jean Baptiste Greuze," Holmes continued, joining his finger tips andleaning well back in his chair, "was a French artist who flourishedbetween the years 1750 and 1800. I allude, of course to his workingcareer. Modern criticism has more than indorsed the high opinion formedof him by his contemporaries."
The inspector's eyes grew abstracted. "Hadn't we better--" he said.
"We are doing so," Holmes interrupted. "All that I am saying has a verydirect and vital bearing upon what you have called the BirlstoneMystery. In fact, it may in a sense be called the very centre of it."
MacDonald smiled feebly, and looked appealingly to me. "Your thoughtsmove a bit too quick for me, Mr. Holmes. You leave out a link or two,and I can't get over the gap. What in the whole wide world can be theconnection between this dead painting man and the affair at Birlstone?"
"All knowledge comes useful to the detective," remarked Holmes. "Eventhe trivial fact that in the year 1865 a picture by Greuze entitled LaJeune Fille a l'Agneau fetched one million two hundred thousandfrancs--more than forty thousand pounds--at the Portalis sale may starta train of reflection in your mind."
It was clear that it did. The inspector looked honestly interested.
"I may remind you," Holmes continued, "that the professor's salary canbe ascertained in several trustworthy books of reference. It is sevenhundred a year."
"Then how could he buy--"
"Quite so! How could he?"
"Ay, that's remarkable," said the inspector thoughtfully. "Talk away,Mr. Holmes. I'm just loving it. It's fine!"
Holmes smiled. He was always warmed by genuine admiration--thecharacteristic of the real artist. "What about Birlstone?" he asked.
"We've time yet," said the inspector, glancing at his watch. "I've acab at the door, and it won't take us twenty minutes to Victoria. Butabout this picture: I thought you told me once, Mr. Holmes, that youhad never met Professor Moriarty."
"No, I never have."
"Then how do you know about his rooms?"
"Ah, that's another matter. I have been three times in his rooms, twicewaiting for him under different pretexts and leaving before he came.Once--well, I can hardly tell about the once to an official detective.It was on the last occasion that I took the liberty of running over hispapers--with the most unexpected results."
"You found something compromising?"
"Absolutely nothing. That was what amazed me. However, you have nowseen the point of the picture. It shows him to be a very wealthy man.How did he acquire wealth? He is unmarried. His younger brother is astation master in the west of England. His chair is worth seven hundreda year. And he owns a Greuze."
"Well?"
"Surely the inference is plain."
"You mean that he has a great income and that he must earn it in anillegal fashion?"
"Exactly. Of course I have other reasons for thinking so--dozens ofexiguous threads which lead vaguely up towards the centre of the webwhere the poisonous, motionless creature is lurking. I only mention theGreuze because it brings the matter within the range of your ownobservation."
"Well, Mr. Holmes, I admit that what you say is interesting: it's morethan interesting--it's just wonderful. But let us have it a littleclearer if you can. Is it forgery, coining, burglary--where does themoney come from?"
"Have you ever read of Jonathan Wild?"
"Well, the name has a familiar sound. Someone in a novel, was he not? Idon't take much stock of detectives in novels--chaps that do things andnever let you see how they do them. That's just inspiration: notbusiness."
"Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel.
He was amaster criminal, and he lived last century--1750 or thereabouts."
"Then he's no use to me. I'm a practical man."
"Mr. Mac, the most practical thing that you ever did in your life wouldbe to shut yourself up for three months and read twelve hours a day atthe annals of crime. Everything comes in circles--even ProfessorMoriarty. Jonathan Wild was the hidden force of the London criminals,to whom he sold his brains and his organization on a fifteen per centcommission. The old wheel turns, and the same spoke comes up. It's allbeen done before, and will be again. I'll tell you one or two thingsabout Moriarty which may interest you."
"You'll interest me, right enough."
"I happen to know who is the first link in his chain--a chain with thisNapoleon-gone-wrong at one end, and a hundred broken fighting men,pickpockets, blackmailers, and card sharpers at the other, with everysort of crime in between. His chief of staff is Colonel SebastianMoran, as aloof and guarded and inaccessible to the law as himself.What do you think he pays him?"
"I'd like to hear."
"Six thousand a year. That's paying for brains, you see--the Americanbusiness principle. I learned that detail quite by chance. It's morethan the Prime Minister gets. That gives you an idea of Moriarty'sgains and of the scale on which he works. Another point: I made it mybusiness to hunt down some of Moriarty's checks lately--just commoninnocent checks that he pays his household bills with. They were drawnon six different banks. Does that make any impression on your mind?"
"Queer, certainly! But what do you gather from it?"
"That he wanted no gossip about his wealth. No single man should knowwhat he had. I have no doubt that he has twenty banking accounts; thebulk of his fortune abroad in the Deutsche Bank or the Credit Lyonnaisas likely as not. Sometime when you have a year or two to spare Icommend to you the study of Professor Moriarty."
Inspector MacDonald had grown steadily more impressed as theconversation proceeded. He had lost himself in his interest. Now hispractical Scotch intelligence brought him back with a snap to thematter in hand.
"He can keep, anyhow," said he. "You've got us side-tracked with yourinteresting anecdotes, Mr. Holmes. What really counts is your remarkthat there is some connection between the professor and the crime. Thatyou get from the warning received through the man Porlock. Can we forour present practical needs get any further than that?"
"We may form some conception as to the motives of the crime. It is, asI gather from your original remarks, an inexplicable, or at least anunexplained, murder. Now, presuming that the source of the crime is aswe suspect it to be, there might be two different motives. In the firstplace, I may tell you that Moriarty rules with a rod of iron over hispeople. His discipline is tremendous. There is only one punishment inhis code. It is death. Now we might suppose that this murderedman--this Douglas whose approaching fate was known by one of thearch-criminal's subordinates--had in some way betrayed the chief. Hispunishment followed, and would be known to all--if only to put the fearof death into them."
"Well, that is one suggestion, Mr. Holmes."
"The other is that it has been engineered by Moriarty in the ordinarycourse of business. Was there any robbery?"
"I have not heard."
"If so, it would, of course, be against the first hypothesis and infavour of the second. Moriarty may have been engaged to engineer it ona promise of part spoils, or he may have been paid so much down tomanage it. Either is possible. But whichever it may be, or if it issome third combination, it is down at Birlstone that we must seek thesolution. I know our man too well to suppose that he has left anythingup here which may lead us to him."
"Then to Birlstone we must go!" cried MacDonald, jumping from hischair. "My word! it's later than I thought. I can give you, gentlemen,five minutes for preparation, and that is all."
"And ample for us both," said Holmes, as he sprang up and hastened tochange from his dressing gown to his coat. "While we are on our way,Mr. Mac, I will ask you to be good enough to tell me all about it."
"All about it" proved to be disappointingly little, and yet there wasenough to assure us that the case before us might well be worthy of theexpert's closest attention. He brightened and rubbed his thin handstogether as he listened to the meagre but remarkable details. A longseries of sterile weeks lay behind us, and here at last there was afitting object for those remarkable powers which, like all specialgifts, become irksome to their owner when they are not in use. Thatrazor brain blunted and rusted with inaction.
Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a warmer hue,and his whole eager face shone with an inward light when the call forwork reached him. Leaning forward in the cab, he listened intently toMacDonald's short sketch of the problem which awaited us in Sussex. Theinspector was himself dependent, as he explained to us, upon ascribbled account forwarded to him by the milk train in the early hoursof the morning. White Mason, the local officer, was a personal friend,and hence MacDonald had been notified much more promptly than is usualat Scotland Yard when provincials need their assistance. It is a verycold scent upon which the Metropolitan expert is generally asked to run.
"DEAR INSPECTOR MACDONALD [said the letter which he read to us]:
"Official requisition for your services is in separate envelope. Thisis for your private eye. Wire me what train in the morning you can getfor Birlstone, and I will meet it--or have it met if I am toooccupied. This case is a snorter. Don't waste a moment in gettingstarted. If you can bring Mr. Holmes, please do so; for he will findsomething after his own heart. We would think the whole thing had beenfixed up for theatrical effect if there wasn't a dead man in the middleof it. My word! it is a snorter."
"Your friend seems to be no fool," remarked Holmes.
"No, sir, White Mason is a very live man, if I am any judge."
"Well, have you anything more?"
"Only that he will give us every detail when we meet."
"Then how did you get at Mr. Douglas and the fact that he had beenhorribly murdered?"
"That was in the enclosed official report. It didn't say 'horrible':that's not a recognized official term. It gave the name John Douglas.It mentioned that his injuries had been in the head, from the dischargeof a shotgun. It also mentioned the hour of the alarm, which was closeon to midnight last night. It added that the case was undoubtedly oneof murder, but that no arrest had been made, and that the case was onewhich presented some very perplexing and extraordinary features. That'sabsolutely all we have at present, Mr. Holmes."
"Then, with your permission, we will leave it at that, Mr. Mac. Thetemptation to form premature theories upon insufficient data is thebane of our profession. I can see only two things for certain atpresent--a great brain in London, and a dead man in Sussex. It's thechain between that we are going to trace."
Chapter 3
The Tragedy of Birlstone
Now for a moment I will ask leave to remove my own insignificantpersonality and to describe events which occurred before we arrivedupon the scene by the light of knowledge which came to us afterwards.Only in this way can I make the reader appreciate the people concernedand the strange setting in which their fate was cast.
The village of Birlstone is a small and very ancient cluster ofhalf-timbered cottages on the northern border of the county of Sussex.For centuries it had remained unchanged; but within the last few yearsits picturesque appearance and situation have attracted a number ofwell-to-do residents, whose villas peep out from the woods around.These woods are locally supposed to be the extreme fringe of the greatWeald forest, which thins away until it reaches the northern chalkdowns. A number of small shops have come into being to meet the wantsof the increased population; so there seems some prospect thatBirlstone may soon grow from an ancient village into a modern town. Itis the centre for a considerable area of country, since TunbridgeWells, the nearest place of importance, is ten or twelve miles to theeastward, over the borders of Kent.
About half a mile from the town, standing in an old park famous for itshuge beech trees, is the ancient Manor House of Birlstone. Part of thisvenerable building dates back to the time of the first crusade, whenHugo de Capus built a fortalice in the centre of the estate, which hadbeen granted to him by the Red King. This was destroyed by fire in1543, and some of its smoke-blackened corner stones were used when, inJacobean times, a brick country house rose upon the ruins of the feudalcastle.
The Manor House, with its many gables and its small diamond-panedwindows, was still much as the builder had left it in the earlyseventeenth century. Of the double moats which had guarded its morewarlike predecessor, the outer had been allowed to dry up, and servedthe humble function of a kitchen garden. The inner one was still there,and lay forty feet in breadth, though now only a few feet in depth,round the whole house. A small stream fed it and continued beyond it,so that the sheet of water, though turbid, was never ditch-like orunhealthy. The ground floor windows were within a foot of the surfaceof the water.
The only approach to the house was over a drawbridge, the chains andwindlass of which had long been rusted and broken. The latest tenantsof the Manor House had, however, with characteristic energy, set thisright, and the drawbridge was not only capable of being raised, butactually was raised every evening and lowered every morning. By thusrenewing the custom of the old feudal days the Manor House wasconverted into an island during the night--a fact which had a verydirect bearing upon the mystery which was soon to engage the attentionof all England.
The house had been untenanted for some years and was threatening tomoulder into a picturesque decay when the Douglases took possession ofit. This family consisted of only two individuals--John Douglas and hiswife. Douglas was a remarkable man, both in character and in person. Inage he may have been about fifty, with a strong-jawed, rugged face, agrizzling moustache, peculiarly keen gray eyes, and a wiry, vigorousfigure which had lost nothing of the strength and activity of youth. Hewas cheery and genial to all, but somewhat offhand in his manners,giving the impression that he had seen life in social strata on somefar lower horizon than the county society of Sussex.
Yet, though looked at with some curiosity and reserve by his morecultivated neighbours, he soon acquired a great popularity among thevillagers, subscribing handsomely to all local objects, and attendingtheir smoking concerts and other functions, where, having a remarkablyrich tenor voice, he was always ready to oblige with an excellent song.He appeared to have plenty of money, which was said to have been gainedin the California gold fields, and it was clear from his own talk andthat of his wife that he had spent a part of his life in America.
The good impression which had been produced by his generosity and byhis democratic manners was increased by a reputation gained for utterindifference to danger. Though a wretched rider, he turned out at everymeet, and took the most amazing falls in his determination to hold hisown with the best. When the vicarage caught fire he distinguishedhimself also by the fearlessness with which he reentered the buildingto save property, after the local fire brigade had given it up asimpossible. Thus it came about that John Douglas of the Manor House hadwithin five years won himself quite a reputation in Birlstone.
His wife, too, was popular with those who had made her acquaintance;though, after the English fashion, the callers upon a stranger whosettled in the county without introductions were few and far between.This mattered the less to her, as she was retiring by disposition, andvery much absorbed, to all appearance, in her husband and her domesticduties. It was known that she was an English lady who had met Mr.Douglas in London, he being at that time a widower. She was a beautifulwoman, tall, dark, and slender, some twenty years younger than herhusband, a disparity which seemed in no wise to mar the contentment oftheir family life.
It was remarked sometimes, however, by those who knew them best, thatthe confidence between the two did not appear to be complete, since thewife was either very reticent about her husband's past life, or else,as seemed more likely, was imperfectly informed about it. It had alsobeen noted and commented upon by a few observant people that there weresigns sometimes of some nerve-strain upon the part of Mrs. Douglas, andthat she would display acute uneasiness if her absent husband shouldever be particularly late in his return. On a quiet countryside, whereall gossip is welcome, this weakness of the lady of the Manor House didnot pass without remark, and it bulked larger upon people's memory whenthe events arose which gave it a very special significance.
There was yet another individual whose residence under that roof was,it is true, only an intermittent one, but whose presence at the time ofthe strange happenings which will now be narrated brought his nameprominently before the public. This was Cecil James Barker, of HalesLodge, Hampstead.
Cecil Barker's tall, loose-jointed figure was a familiar one in themain street of Birlstone village; for he was a frequent and welcomevisitor at the Manor House. He was the more noticed as being the onlyfriend of the past unknown life of Mr. Douglas who was ever seen in hisnew English surroundings. Barker was himself an undoubted Englishman;but by his remarks it was clear that he had first known Douglas inAmerica and had there lived on intimate terms with him. He appeared tobe a man of considerable wealth, and was reputed to be a bachelor.
In age he was rather younger than Douglas--forty-five at the most--atall, straight, broad-chested fellow with a clean-shaved, prize-fighterface, thick, strong, black eyebrows, and a pair of masterful black eyeswhich might, even without the aid of his very capable hands, clear away for him through a hostile crowd. He neither rode nor shot, butspent his days in wandering round the old village with his pipe in hismouth, or in driving with his host, or in his absence with his hostess,over the beautiful countryside. "An easy-going, free-handed gentleman,"said Ames, the butler. "But, my word! I had rather not be the man thatcrossed him!" He was cordial and intimate with Douglas, and he was noless friendly with his wife--a friendship which more than once seemedto cause some irritation to the husband, so that even the servants wereable to perceive his annoyance. Such was the third person who was oneof the family when the catastrophe occurred.
As to the other denizens of the old building, it will suffice out of alarge household to mention the prim, respectable, and capable Ames, andMrs. Allen, a buxom and cheerful person, who relieved the lady of someof her household cares. The other six servants in the house bear norelation to the events of the night of January 6th.
It was at eleven forty-five that the first alarm reached the smalllocal police station, in charge of Sergeant Wilson of the SussexConstabulary. Cecil Barker, much excited, had rushed up to the door andpealed furiously upon the bell. A terrible tragedy had occurred at theManor House, and John Douglas had been murdered. That was thebreathless burden of his message. He had hurried back to the house,followed within a few minutes by the police sergeant, who ar
rived atthe scene of the crime a little after twelve o'clock, after takingprompt steps to warn the county authorities that something serious wasafoot.
On reaching the Manor House, the sergeant had found the drawbridgedown, the windows lighted up, and the whole household in a state ofwild confusion and alarm. The white-faced servants were huddlingtogether in the hall, with the frightened butler wringing his hands inthe doorway. Only Cecil Barker seemed to be master of himself and hisemotions; he had opened the door which was nearest to the entrance andhe had beckoned to the sergeant to follow him. At that moment therearrived Dr. Wood, a brisk and capable general practitioner from thevillage. The three men entered the fatal room together, while thehorror-stricken butler followed at their heels, closing the door behindhim to shut out the terrible scene from the maid servants.
The dead man lay on his back, sprawling with outstretched limbs in thecentre of the room. He was clad only in a pink dressing gown, whichcovered his night clothes. There were carpet slippers on his bare feet.The doctor knelt beside him and held down the hand lamp which had stoodon the table. One glance at the victim was enough to show the healerthat his presence could be dispensed with. The man had been horriblyinjured. Lying across his chest was a curious weapon, a shotgun withthe barrel sawed off a foot in front of the triggers. It was clear thatthis had been fired at close range and that he had received the wholecharge in the face, blowing his head almost to pieces. The triggers hadbeen wired together, so as to make the simultaneous discharge moredestructive.
The country policeman was unnerved and troubled by the tremendousresponsibility which had come so suddenly upon him. "We will touchnothing until my superiors arrive," he said in a hushed voice, staringin horror at the dreadful head.
"Nothing has been touched up to now," said Cecil Barker. "I'll answerfor that. You see it all exactly as I found it."
"When was that?" The sergeant had drawn out his notebook.
"It was just half-past eleven. I had not begun to undress, and I wassitting by the fire in my bedroom when I heard the report. It was notvery loud--it seemed to be muffled. I rushed down--I don't suppose itwas thirty seconds before I was in the room."
"Was the door open?"
"Yes, it was open. Poor Douglas was lying as you see him. His bedroomcandle was burning on the table. It was I who lit the lamp some minutesafterward."
"Did you see no one?"
"No. I heard Mrs. Douglas coming down the stair behind me, and I rushedout to prevent her from seeing this dreadful sight. Mrs. Allen, thehousekeeper, came and took her away. Ames had arrived, and we ran backinto the room once more."
"But surely I have heard that the drawbridge is kept up all night."
"Yes, it was up until I lowered it."
"Then how could any murderer have got away? It is out of the question!Mr. Douglas must have shot himself."
"That was our first idea. But see!" Barker drew aside the curtain, andshowed that the long, diamond-paned window was open to its full extent."And look at this!" He held the lamp down and illuminated a smudge ofblood like the mark of a boot-sole upon the wooden sill. "Someone hasstood there in getting out."
"You mean that someone waded across the moat?"
"Exactly!"
"Then if you were in the room within half a minute of the crime, hemust have been in the water at that very moment."
"I have not a doubt of it. I wish to heaven that I had rushed to thewindow! But the curtain screened it, as you can see, and so it neveroccurred to me. Then I heard the step of Mrs. Douglas, and I could notlet her enter the room. It would have been too horrible."
"Horrible enough!" said the doctor, looking at the shattered head andthe terrible marks which surrounded it. "I've never seen such injuriessince the Birlstone railway smash."
"But, I say," remarked the police sergeant, whose slow, bucolic commonsense was still pondering the open window. "It's all very well yoursaying that a man escaped by wading this moat, but what I ask you is,how did he ever get into the house at all if the bridge was up?"
"Ah, that's the question," said Barker.
"At what o'clock was it raised?"
"It was nearly six o'clock," said Ames, the butler.
"I've heard," said the sergeant, "that it was usually raised at sunset.That would be nearer half-past four than six at this time of year."
"Mrs. Douglas had visitors to tea," said Ames. "I couldn't raise ituntil they went. Then I wound it up myself."
"Then it comes to this," said the sergeant: "If anyone came fromoutside--if they did--they must have got in across the bridge beforesix and been in hiding ever since, until Mr. Douglas came into the roomafter eleven."
"That is so! Mr. Douglas went round the house every night the lastthing before he turned in to see that the lights were right. Thatbrought him in here. The man was waiting and shot him. Then he got awaythrough the window and left his gun behind him. That's how I read it;for nothing else will fit the facts."
The sergeant picked up a card which lay beside the dead man on thefloor. The initials V. V. and under them the number 341 were rudelyscrawled in ink upon it.
"What's this?" he asked, holding it up.
Barker looked at it with curiosity. "I never noticed it before," hesaid. "The murderer must have left it behind him."
"V. V.--341. I can make no sense of that."
The sergeant kept turning it over in his big fingers. "What's V. V.?Somebody's initials, maybe. What have you got there, Dr. Wood?"
It was a good-sized hammer which had been lying on the rug in front ofthe fireplace--a substantial, workmanlike hammer. Cecil Barker pointedto a box of brass-headed nails upon the mantelpiece.
"Mr. Douglas was altering the pictures yesterday," he said. "I saw himmyself, standing upon that chair and fixing the big picture above it.That accounts for the hammer."
"We'd best put it back on the rug where we found it," said thesergeant, scratching his puzzled head in his perplexity. "It will wantthe best brains in the force to get to the bottom of this thing. Itwill be a London job before it is finished." He raised the hand lampand walked slowly round the room. "Hullo!" he cried, excitedly, drawingthe window curtain to one side. "What o'clock were those curtainsdrawn?"
"When the lamps were lit," said the butler. "It would be shortly afterfour."
"Someone had been hiding here, sure enough." He held down the light,and the marks of muddy boots were very visible in the corner. "I'mbound to say this bears out your theory, Mr. Barker. It looks as if theman got into the house after four when the curtains were drawn andbefore six when the bridge was raised. He slipped into this room,because it was the first that he saw. There was no other place where hecould hide, so he popped in behind this curtain. That all seems clearenough. It is likely that his main idea was to burgle the house; butMr. Douglas chanced to come upon him, so he murdered him and escaped."
"That's how I read it," said Barker. "But, I say, aren't we wastingprecious time? Couldn't we start out and scour the country before thefellow gets away?"
The sergeant considered for a moment.
"There are no trains before six in the morning; so he can't get away byrail. If he goes by road with his legs all dripping, it's odds thatsomeone will notice him. Anyhow, I can't leave here myself until I amrelieved. But I think none of you should go until we see more clearlyhow we all stand."
The doctor had taken the lamp and was narrowly scrutinizing the body."What's this mark?" he asked. "Could this have any connection with thecrime?"
The dead man's right arm was thrust out from his dressing gown, andexposed as high as the elbow. About halfway up the forearm was acurious brown design, a triangle inside a circle, standing out in vividrelief upon the lard-coloured skin.
"It's not tattooed," said the doctor, peering through his glasses. "Inever saw anything like it. The man has been branded at some time asthey brand cattle. What is the meaning of this?"
"I don't profess to know the meaning of it," said Cecil Barker; "but Ihave seen the mark on
Douglas many times this last ten years."
"And so have I," said the butler. "Many a time when the master hasrolled up his sleeves I have noticed that very mark. I've oftenwondered what it could be."
"Then it has nothing to do with the crime, anyhow," said the sergeant."But it's a rum thing all the same. Everything about this case is rum.Well, what is it now?"
The butler had given an exclamation of astonishment and was pointing atthe dead man's outstretched hand.
"They've taken his wedding ring!" he gasped.
"What!"
"Yes, indeed. Master always wore his plain gold wedding ring on thelittle finger of his left hand. That ring with the rough nugget on itwas above it, and the twisted snake ring on the third finger. There'sthe nugget and there's the snake, but the wedding ring is gone."
"He's right," said Barker.
"Do you tell me," said the sergeant, "that the wedding ring was belowthe other?"
"Always!"
"Then the murderer, or whoever it was, first took off this ring youcall the nugget ring, then the wedding ring, and afterwards put thenugget ring back again."
"That is so!"
The worthy country policeman shook his head. "Seems to me the sooner weget London on to this case the better," said he. "White Mason is asmart man. No local job has ever been too much for White Mason. Itwon't be long now before he is here to help us. But I expect we'll haveto look to London before we are through. Anyhow, I'm not ashamed to saythat it is a deal too thick for the likes of me."
Chapter 4
Darkness
At three in the morning the chief Sussex detective, obeying the urgentcall from Sergeant Wilson of Birlstone, arrived from headquarters in alight dog-cart behind a breathless trotter. By the five-forty train inthe morning he had sent his message to Scotland Yard, and he was at theBirlstone station at twelve o'clock to welcome us. White Mason was aquiet, comfortable-looking person in a loose tweed suit, with aclean-shaved, ruddy face, a stoutish body, and powerful bandy legsadorned with gaiters, looking like a small farmer, a retiredgamekeeper, or anything upon earth except a very favourable specimen ofthe provincial criminal officer.
"A real downright snorter, Mr. MacDonald!" he kept repeating. "We'llhave the pressmen down like flies when they understand it. I'm hopingwe will get our work done before they get poking their noses into itand messing up all the trails. There has been nothing like this that Ican remember. There are some bits that will come home to you, Mr.Holmes, or I am mistaken. And you also, Dr. Watson; for the medicoswill have a word to say before we finish. Your room is at the WestvilleArms. There's no other place; but I hear that it is clean and good. Theman will carry your bags. This way, gentlemen, if you please."
He was a very bustling and genial person, this Sussex detective. In tenminutes we had all found our quarters. In ten more we were seated inthe parlour of the inn and being treated to a rapid sketch of thoseevents which have been outlined in the previous chapter. MacDonald madean occasional note, while Holmes sat absorbed, with the expression ofsurprised and reverent admiration with which the botanist surveys therare and precious bloom.
"Remarkable!" he said, when the story was unfolded, "most remarkable! Ican hardly recall any case where the features have been more peculiar."
"I thought you would say so, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason in greatdelight. "We're well up with the times in Sussex. I've told you now howmatters were, up to the time when I took over from Sergeant Wilsonbetween three and four this morning. My word! I made the old mare go!But I need not have been in such a hurry, as it turned out; for therewas nothing immediate that I could do. Sergeant Wilson had all thefacts. I checked them and considered them and maybe added a few of myown."
"What were they?" asked Holmes eagerly.
"Well, I first had the hammer examined. There was Dr. Wood there tohelp me. We found no signs of violence upon it. I was hoping that ifMr. Douglas defended himself with the hammer, he might have left hismark upon the murderer before he dropped it on the mat. But there wasno stain."
"That, of course, proves nothing at all," remarked Inspector MacDonald."There has been many a hammer murder and no trace on the hammer."
"Quite so. It doesn't prove it wasn't used. But there might have beenstains, and that would have helped us. As a matter of fact there werenone. Then I examined the gun. They were buckshot cartridges, and, asSergeant Wilson pointed out, the triggers were wired together so that,if you pulled on the hinder one, both barrels were discharged. Whoeverfixed that up had made up his mind that he was going to take no chancesof missing his man. The sawed gun was not more than two foot long--onecould carry it easily under one's coat. There was no complete maker'sname; but the printed letters P-E-N were on the fluting between thebarrels, and the rest of the name had been cut off by the saw."
"A big P with a flourish above it, E and N smaller?" asked Holmes.
"Exactly."
"Pennsylvania Small Arms Company--well-known American firm," saidHolmes.
White Mason gazed at my friend as the little village practitioner looksat the Harley Street specialist who by a word can solve thedifficulties that perplex him.
"That is very helpful, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. Wonderful!Wonderful! Do you carry the names of all the gun makers in the world inyour memory?"
Holmes dismissed the subject with a wave.
"No doubt it is an American shotgun," White Mason continued. "I seem tohave read that a sawed-off shotgun is a weapon used in some parts ofAmerica. Apart from the name upon the barrel, the idea had occurred tome. There is some evidence then, that this man who entered the houseand killed its master was an American."
MacDonald shook his head. "Man, you are surely travelling overfast,"said he. "I have heard no evidence yet that any stranger was ever inthe house at all."
"The open window, the blood on the sill, the queer card, the marks ofboots in the corner, the gun!"
"Nothing there that could not have been arranged. Mr. Douglas was anAmerican, or had lived long in America. So had Mr. Barker. You don'tneed to import an American from outside in order to account forAmerican doings."
"Ames, the butler--"
"What about him? Is he reliable?"
"Ten years with Sir Charles Chandos--as solid as a rock. He has beenwith Douglas ever since he took the Manor House five years ago. He hasnever seen a gun of this sort in the house."
"The gun was made to conceal. That's why the barrels were sawed. Itwould fit into any box. How could he swear there was no such gun in thehouse?"
"Well, anyhow, he had never seen one."
MacDonald shook his obstinate Scotch head. "I'm not convinced yet thatthere was ever anyone in the house," said he. "I'm asking you toconseedar" (his accent became more Aberdonian as he lost himself in hisargument) "I'm asking you to conseedar what it involves if you supposethat this gun was ever brought into the house, and that all thesestrange things were done by a person from outside. Oh, man, it's justinconceivable! It's clean against common sense! I put it to you, Mr.Holmes, judging it by what we have heard."
"Well, state your case, Mr. Mac," said Holmes in his most judicialstyle.
"The man is not a burglar, supposing that he ever existed. The ringbusiness and the card point to premeditated murder for some privatereason. Very good. Here is a man who slips into a house with thedeliberate intention of committing murder. He knows, if he knowsanything, that he will have a deeficulty in making his escape, as thehouse is surrounded with water. What weapon would he choose? You wouldsay the most silent in the world. Then he could hope when the deed wasdone to slip quickly from the window, to wade the moat, and to get awayat his leisure. That's understandable. But is it understandable that heshould go out of his way to bring with him the most noisy weapon hecould select, knowing well that it will fetch every human being in thehouse to the spot as quick as they can run, and that it is all oddsthat he will be seen before he can get across the moat? Is thatcredible, Mr. Holmes?"
"Well, you put the case strongly," my friend replied thoughtfully. "Itcertainly needs a good deal of justification. May I ask, Mr. WhiteMason, whether you examined the farther side of the moat at once to seeif there were any signs of the man having climbed out from the water?"
"There were no signs, Mr. Holmes. But it is a stone ledge, and onecould hardly expect them."
"No tracks or marks?"
"None."
"Ha! Would there be any objection, Mr. White Mason, to our going downto the house at once? There may possibly be some small point whichmight be suggestive."
"I was going to propose it, Mr. Holmes; but I thought it well to putyou in touch with all the facts before we go. I suppose if anythingshould strike you--" White Mason looked doubtfully at the amateur.
"I have worked with Mr. Holmes before," said Inspector MacDonald. "Heplays the game."
"My own idea of the game, at any rate," said Holmes, with a smile. "Igo into a case to help the ends of justice and the work of the police.If I have ever separated myself from the official force, it is becausethey have first separated themselves from me. I have no wish ever toscore at their expense. At the same time, Mr. White Mason, I claim theright to work in my own way and give my results at my owntime--complete rather than in stages."
"I am sure we are honoured by your presence and to show you all weknow," said White Mason cordially. "Come along, Dr. Watson, and whenthe time comes we'll all hope for a place in your book."
We walked down the quaint village street with a row of pollarded elmson eac
h side of it. Just beyond were two ancient stone pillars,weather-stained and lichen-blotched bearing upon their summits ashapeless something which had once been the rampant lion of Capus ofBirlstone. A short walk along the winding drive with such sward andoaks around it as one only sees in rural England, then a sudden turn,and the long, low Jacobean house of dingy, liver-coloured brick laybefore us, with an old-fashioned garden of cut yews on each side of it.As we approached it, there was the wooden drawbridge and the beautifulbroad moat as still and luminous as quicksilver in the cold, wintersunshine.
Three centuries had flowed past the old Manor House, centuries ofbirths and of homecomings, of country dances and of the meetings of foxhunters. Strange that now in its old age this dark business should havecast its shadow upon the venerable walls! And yet those strange, peakedroofs and quaint, overhung gables were a fitting covering to grim andterrible intrigue. As I looked at the deep-set windows and the longsweep of the dull-coloured, water-lapped front, I felt that no morefitting scene could be set for such a tragedy.
"That's the window," said White Mason, "that one on the immediate rightof the drawbridge. It's open just as it was found last night."
"It looks rather narrow for a man to pass."
"Well, it wasn't a fat man, anyhow. We don't need your deductions, Mr.Holmes, to tell us that. But you or I could squeeze through all right."
Holmes walked to the edge of the moat and looked across. Then heexamined the stone ledge and the grass border beyond it.
"I've had a good look, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason. "There is nothingthere, no sign that anyone has landed--but why should he leave anysign?"
"Exactly. Why should he? Is the water always turbid?"
"Generally about this colour. The stream brings down the clay."
"How deep is it?"
"About two feet at each side and three in the middle."
"So we can put aside all idea of the man having been drowned incrossing."
"No, a child could not be drowned in it."
We walked across the drawbridge, and were admitted by a quaint,gnarled, dried-up person, who was the butler, Ames. The poor old fellowwas white and quivering from the shock. The village sergeant, a tall,formal, melancholy man, still held his vigil in the room of Fate. Thedoctor had departed.
"Anything fresh, Sergeant Wilson?" asked White Mason.
"No, sir."
"Then you can go home. You've had enough. We can send for you if wewant you. The butler had better wait outside. Tell him to warn Mr.Cecil Barker, Mrs. Douglas, and the housekeeper that we may want a wordwith them presently. Now, gentlemen, perhaps you will allow me to giveyou the views I have formed first, and then you will be able to arriveat your own."
He impressed me, this country specialist. He had a solid grip of factand a cool, clear, common-sense brain, which should take him some wayin his profession. Holmes listened to him intently, with no sign ofthat impatience which the official exponent too often produced.
"Is it suicide, or is it murder--that's our first question, gentlemen,is it not? If it were suicide, then we have to believe that this manbegan by taking off his wedding ring and concealing it; that he thencame down here in his dressing gown, trampled mud into a corner behindthe curtain in order to give the idea someone had waited for him,opened the window, put blood on the--"
"We can surely dismiss that," said MacDonald.
"So I think. Suicide is out of the question. Then a murder has beendone. What we have to determine is, whether it was done by someoneoutside or inside the house."
"Well, let's hear the argument."
"There are considerable difficulties both ways, and yet one or theother it must be. We will suppose first that some person or personsinside the house did the crime. They got this man down here at a timewhen everything was still and yet no one was asleep. They then did thedeed with the queerest and noisiest weapon in the world so as to telleveryone what had happened--a weapon that was never seen in the housebefore. That does not seem a very likely start, does it?"
"No, it does not."
"Well, then, everyone is agreed that after the alarm was given only aminute at the most had passed before the whole household--not Mr. CecilBarker alone, though he claims to have been the first, but Ames and allof them were on the spot. Do you tell me that in that time the guiltyperson managed to make footmarks in the corner, open the window, markthe sill with blood, take the wedding ring off the dead man's finger,and all the rest of it? It's impossible!"
"You put it very clearly," said Holmes. "I am inclined to agree withyou."
"Well, then, we are driven back to the theory that it was done bysomeone from outside. We are still faced with some big difficulties;but anyhow they have ceased to be impossibilities. The man got into thehouse between four-thirty and six; that is to say, between dusk and thetime when the bridge was raised. There had been some visitors, and thedoor was open; so there was nothing to prevent him. He may have been acommon burglar, or he may have had some private grudge against Mr.Douglas. Since Mr. Douglas has spent most of his life in America, andthis shotgun seems to be an American weapon, it would seem that theprivate grudge is the more likely theory. He slipped into this roombecause it was the first he came to, and he hid behind the curtain.There he remained until past eleven at night. At that time Mr. Douglasentered the room. It was a short interview, if there were any interviewat all; for Mrs. Douglas declares that her husband had not left hermore than a few minutes when she heard the shot."
"The candle shows that," said Holmes.
"Exactly. The candle, which was a new one, is not burned more than halfan inch. He must have placed it on the table before he was attacked;otherwise, of course, it would have fallen when he fell. This showsthat he was not attacked the instant that he entered the room. When Mr.Barker arrived the candle was lit and the lamp was out."
"That's all clear enough."
"Well, now, we can reconstruct things on those lines. Mr. Douglasenters the room. He puts down the candle. A man appears from behind thecurtain. He is armed with this gun. He demands the wedding ring--Heavenonly knows why, but so it must have been. Mr. Douglas gave it up. Theneither in cold blood or in the course of a struggle--Douglas may havegripped the hammer that was found upon the mat--he shot Douglas in thishorrible way. He dropped his gun and also it would seem this queercard--V. V. 341, whatever that may mean--and he made his escape throughthe window and across the moat at the very moment when Cecil Barker wasdiscovering the crime. How's that, Mr. Holmes?"
"Very interesting, but just a little unconvincing."
"Man, it would be absolute nonsense if it wasn't that anything else iseven worse!" cried MacDonald. "Somebody killed the man, and whoever itwas I could clearly prove to you that he should have done it some otherway. What does he mean by allowing his retreat to be cut off like that?What does he mean by using a shotgun when silence was his one chance ofescape? Come, Mr. Holmes, it's up to you to give us a lead, since yousay Mr. White Mason's theory is unconvincing."
Holmes had sat intently observant during this long discussion, missingno word that was said, with his keen eyes darting to right and to left,and his forehead wrinkled with speculation.
"I should like a few more facts before I get so far as a theory, Mr.Mac," said he, kneeling down beside the body. "Dear me! these injuriesare really appalling. Can we have the butler in for a moment? . . .Ames, I understand that you have often seen this very unusual mark--abranded triangle inside a circle--upon Mr. Douglas's forearm?"
"Frequently, sir."
"You never heard any speculation as to what it meant?"
"No, sir."
"It must have caused great pain when it was inflicted. It isundoubtedly a burn. Now, I observe, Ames, that there is a small pieceof plaster at the angle of Mr. Douglas's jaw. Did you observe that inlife?"
"Yes, sir, he cut himself in shaving yesterday morning."
"Did you ever know him to cut himself in shaving before?"
"Not for a very long time, sir."
r />
"Suggestive!" said Holmes. "It may, of course, be a mere coincidence,or it may point to some nervousness which would indicate that he hadreason to apprehend danger. Had you noticed anything unusual in hisconduct, yesterday, Ames?"
"It struck me that he was a little restless and excited, sir."
"Ha! The attack may not have been entirely unexpected. We do seem tomake a little progress, do we not? Perhaps you would rather do thequestioning, Mr. Mac?"
"No, Mr. Holmes, it's in better hands than mine."
"Well, then, we will pass to this card--V. V. 341. It is roughcardboard. Have you any of the sort in the house?"
"I don't think so."
Holmes walked across to the desk and dabbed a little ink from eachbottle on to the blotting paper. "It was not printed in this room," hesaid; "this is black ink and the other purplish. It was done by a thickpen, and these are fine. No, it was done elsewhere, I should say. Canyou make anything of the inscription, Ames?"
"No, sir, nothing."
"What do you think, Mr. Mac?"
"It gives me the impression of a secret society of some sort; the samewith his badge upon the forearm."
"That's my idea, too," said White Mason.
"Well, we can adopt it as a working hypothesis and then see how far ourdifficulties disappear. An agent from such a society makes his way intothe house, waits for Mr. Douglas, blows his head nearly off with thisweapon, and escapes by wading the moat, after leaving a card beside thedead man, which will when mentioned in the papers, tell other membersof the society that vengeance has been done. That all hangs together.But why this gun, of all weapons?"
"Exactly."
"And why the missing ring?"
"Quite so."
"And why no arrest? It's past two now. I take it for granted that sincedawn every constable within forty miles has been looking out for a wetstranger?"
"That is so, Mr. Holmes."
"Well, unless he has a burrow close by or a change of clothes ready,they can hardly miss him. And yet they have missed him up to now!"Holmes had gone to the window and was examining with his lens the bloodmark on the sill. "It is clearly the tread of a shoe. It is remarkablybroad; a splay-foot, one would say. Curious, because, so far as one cantrace any footmark in this mud-stained corner, one would say it was amore shapely sole. However, they are certainly very indistinct. What'sthis under the side table?"
"Mr. Douglas's dumb-bells," said Ames.
"Dumb-bell--there's only one. Where's the other?"
"I don't know, Mr. Holmes. There may have been only one. I have notnoticed them for months."
"One dumb-bell--" Holmes said seriously; but his remarks wereinterrupted by a sharp knock at the door.
A tall, sunburned, capable-looking, clean-shaved man looked in at us. Ihad no difficulty in guessing that it was the Cecil Barker of whom Ihad heard. His masterful eyes travelled quickly with a questioningglance from face to face.
"Sorry to interrupt your consultation," said he, "but you should hearthe latest news."
"An arrest?"
"No such luck. But they've found his bicycle. The fellow left hisbicycle behind him. Come and have a look. It is within a hundred yardsof the hall door."
We found three or four grooms and idlers standing in the driveinspecting a bicycle which had been drawn out from a clump ofevergreens in which it had been concealed. It was a well usedRudge-Whitworth, splashed as from a considerable journey. There was asaddlebag with spanner and oilcan, but no clue as to the owner.
"It would be a grand help to the police," said the inspector, "if thesethings were numbered and registered. But we must be thankful for whatwe've got. If we can't find where he went to, at least we are likely toget where he came from. But what in the name of all that is wonderfulmade the fellow leave it behind? And how in the world has he got awaywithout it? We don't seem to get a gleam of light in the case, Mr.Holmes."
"Don't we?" my friend answered thoughtfully. "I wonder!"
Chapter 5
The People Of the Drama
"Have you seen all you want of the study?" asked White Mason as wereentered the house.
"For the time," said the inspector, and Holmes nodded.
"Then perhaps you would now like to hear the evidence of some of thepeople in the house. We could use the dining-room, Ames. Please comeyourself first and tell us what you know."
The butler's account was a simple and a clear one, and he gave aconvincing impression of sincerity. He had been engaged five yearsbefore, when Douglas first came to Birlstone. He understood that Mr.Douglas was a rich gentleman who had made his money in America. He hadbeen a kind and considerate employer--not quite what Ames was used to,perhaps; but one can't have everything. He never saw any signs ofapprehension in Mr. Douglas: on the contrary, he was the most fearlessman he had ever known. He ordered the drawbridge to be pulled up everynight because it was the ancient custom of the old house, and he likedto keep the old ways up.
Mr. Douglas seldom went to London or left the village; but on the daybefore the crime he had been shopping at Tunbridge Wells. He (Ames) hadobserved some restlessness and excitement on the part of Mr. Douglasthat day; for he had seemed impatient and irritable, which was unusualwith him. He had not gone to bed that night; but was in the pantry atthe back of the house, putting away the silver, when he heard the bellring violently. He heard no shot; but it was hardly possible he would,as the pantry and kitchens were at the very back of the house and therewere several closed doors and a long passage between. The housekeeperhad come out of her room, attracted by the violent ringing of the bell.They had gone to the front of the house together.
As they reached the bottom of the stair he had seen Mrs. Douglas comingdown it. No, she was not hurrying; it did not seem to him that she wasparticularly agitated. Just as she reached the bottom of the stair Mr.Barker had rushed out of the study. He had stopped Mrs. Douglas andbegged her to go back.
"For God's sake, go back to your room!" he cried. "Poor Jack is dead!You can do nothing. For God's sake, go back!"
After some persuasion upon the stairs Mrs. Douglas had gone back. Shedid not scream. She made no outcry whatever. Mrs. Allen, thehousekeeper, had taken her upstairs and stayed with her in the bedroom.Ames and Mr. Barker had then returned to the study, where they hadfound everything exactly as the police had seen it. The candle was notlit at that time; but the lamp was burning. They had looked out of thewindow; but the night was very dark and nothing could be seen or heard.They had then rushed out into the hall, where Ames had turned thewindlass which lowered the drawbridge. Mr. Barker had then hurried offto get the police.
Such, in its essentials, was the evidence of the butler.
The account of Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, was, so far as it went, acorroboration of that of her fellow servant. The housekeeper's room wasrather nearer to the front of the house than the pantry in which Ameshad been working. She was preparing to go to bed when the loud ringingof the bell had attracted her attention. She was a little hard ofhearing. Perhaps that was why she had not heard the shot; but in anycase the study was a long way off. She remembered hearing some soundwhich she imagined to be the slamming of a door. That was a good dealearlier--half an hour at least before the ringing of the bell. When Mr.Ames ran to the front she went with him. She saw Mr. Barker, very paleand excited, come out of the study. He intercepted Mrs. Douglas, whowas coming down the stairs. He entreated her to go back, and sheanswered him, but what she said could not be heard.
"Take her up! Stay with her!" he had said to Mrs. Allen.
She had therefore taken her to the bedroom, and endeavoured to sootheher. She was greatly excited, trembling all over, but made no otherattempt to go downstairs. She just sat in her dressing gown by herbedroom fire, with her head sunk in her hands. Mrs. Allen stayed withher most of the night. As to the other servants, they had all gone tobed, and the alarm did not reach them until just before the policearrived. They slept at the extreme back of the house, and could notpossibly have heard anything.
So far the housekeeper could add nothing on cross-examination savelamentations and expressions of amazement.
Cecil Barker succeeded Mrs. Allen as a witness. As to the occurrencesof the night before, he had very little to add to what he had alreadytold the police. Personally, he was convinced that the murderer hadescaped by the window. The bloodstain was conclusive, in his opinion,on that point. Besides, as the bridge was up, there was no otherpossible way of escaping. He could not explain what had become of theassassin or why he had not taken his bicycle, if it were indeed his. Hecould not possibly have been drowned in the moat, which was at no placemore than three feet deep.
In his own mind he had a very definite theory about the murder. Douglaswas a reticent man, and there were some chapters in his life of whichhe never spoke. He had emigrated to America when he was a very youngman. He had prospered well, and Barker had first met him in California,where they had become partners in a successful mining claim at a placecalled Benito Canyon. They had done very well; but Douglas had suddenlysold out and started for England. He was a widower at that time. Barkerhad afterwards realized his money and come to live in London. Thus theyhad renewed their friendship.
Douglas had given him the impression that some danger was hanging overhis head, and he had always looked upon his sudden departure fromCalifornia, and also his renting a house in so quiet a place inEngland, as being connected with this peril. He imagined that somesecret society, some implacable organization, was on Douglas's track,which would never rest until it killed him. Some remarks of his hadgiven him this idea; though he had never told him what the society was,nor how he had come to offend it. He could only suppose that the legendupon the placard had some reference to this secret society.
"How long were you with Douglas in California?" asked InspectorMacDonald.
"Five years altogether."
"He was a bachelor, you say?"
"A widower."
"Have you ever heard where his first wife came from?"
"No, I remember his saying that she was of German extraction, and Ihave seen her portrait. She was a very beautiful woman. She died oftyphoid the year before I met him."
"You don't associate his past with any particular part of America?"
"I have heard him talk of Chicago. He knew that city well and hadworked there. I have heard him talk of the coal and iron districts. Hehad travelled a good deal in his time."
"Was he a politician? Had this secret society to do with politics?"
"No, he cared nothing about politics."
"You have no reason to think it was criminal?"
"On the contrary, I never met a straighter man in my life."
"Was there anything curious about his life in California?"
"He liked best to stay and to work at our claim in the mountains. Hewould never go where other men were if he could help it. That's why Ifirst thought that someone was after him. Then when he left so suddenlyfor Europe I made sure that it was so. I believe that he had a warningof some sort. Within a week of his leaving half a dozen men wereinquiring for him."
"What sort of men?"
"Well, they were a mighty hard-looking crowd. They came up to the claimand wanted to know where he was. I told them that he was gone to Europeand that I did not know where to find him. They meant him no good--itwas easy to see that."
"Were these men Americans--Californians?"
"Well, I don't know about Californians. They were Americans, all right.But they were not miners. I don't know what they were, and was veryglad to see their backs."
"That was six years ago?"
"Nearer seven."
"And then you were together five years in California, so that thisbusiness dates back not less than eleven years at the least?"
"That is so."
"It must be a very serious feud that would be kept up with suchearnestness for as long as that. It would be no light thing that wouldgive rise to it."
"I t
hink it shadowed his whole life. It was never quite out of hismind."
"But if a man had a danger hanging over him, and knew what it was,don't you think he would turn to the police for protection?"
"Maybe it was some danger that he could not be protected against.There's one thing you should know. He always went about armed. Hisrevolver was never out of his pocket. But, by bad luck, he was in hisdressing gown and had left it in the bedroom last night. Once thebridge was up, I guess he thought he was safe."
"I should like these dates a little clearer," said MacDonald. "It isquite six years since Douglas left California. You followed him nextyear, did you not?"
"That is so."
"And he had been married five years. You must have returned about thetime of his marriage."
"About a month before. I was his best man."
"Did you know Mrs. Douglas before her marriage?"
"No, I did not. I had been away from England for ten years."
"But you have seen a good deal of her since."
Barker looked sternly at the detective. "I have seen a good deal of himsince," he answered. "If I have seen her, it is because you cannotvisit a man without knowing his wife. If you imagine there is anyconnection--"
"I imagine nothing, Mr. Barker. I am bound to make every inquiry whichcan bear upon the case. But I mean no offense."
"Some inquiries are offensive," Barker answered angrily.
"It's only the facts that we want. It is in your interest andeveryone's interest that they should be cleared up. Did Mr. Douglasentirely approve your friendship with his wife?"
Barker grew paler, and his great, strong hands were claspedconvulsively together. "You have no right to ask such questions!" hecried. "What has this to do with the matter you are investigating?"
"I must repeat the question."
"Well, I refuse to answer."
"You can refuse to answer; but you must be aware that your refusal isin itself an answer, for you would not refuse if you had not somethingto conceal."
Barker stood for a moment with his face set grimly and his strong blackeyebrows drawn low in intense thought. Then he looked up with a smile."Well, I guess you gentlemen are only doing your clear duty after all,and I have no right to stand in the way of it. I'd only ask you not toworry Mrs. Douglas over this matter; for she has enough upon her justnow. I may tell you that poor Douglas had just one fault in the world,and that was his jealousy. He was fond of me--no man could be fonder ofa friend. And he was devoted to his wife. He loved me to come here, andwas forever sending for me. And yet if his wife and I talked togetheror there seemed any sympathy between us, a kind of wave of jealousywould pass over him, and he would be off the handle and saying thewildest things in a moment. More than once I've sworn off coming forthat reason, and then he would write me such penitent, imploringletters that I just had to. But you can take it from me, gentlemen, ifit was my last word, that no man ever had a more loving, faithfulwife--and I can say also no friend could be more loyal than I!"
It was spoken with fervour and feeling, and yet Inspector MacDonaldcould not dismiss the subject.
"You are aware," said he, "that the dead man's wedding ring has beentaken from his finger?"
"So it appears," said Barker.
"What do you mean by 'appears'? You know it as a fact."
The man seemed confused and undecided. "When I said 'appears' I meantthat it was conceivable that he had himself taken off the ring."
"The mere fact that the ring should be absent, whoever may have removedit, would suggest to anyone's mind, would it not, that the marriage andthe tragedy were connected?"
Barker shrugged his broad shoulders. "I can't profess to say what itmeans." he answered. "But if you mean to hint that it could reflect inany way upon this lady's honour"--his eyes blazed for an instant, andthen with an evident effort he got a grip upon his own emotions--"well,you are on the wrong track, that's all."
"I don't know that I've anything else to ask you at present," saidMacDonald, coldly.
"There was one small point," remarked Sherlock Holmes. "When youentered the room there was only a candle lighted on the table, wasthere not?"
"Yes, that was so."
"By its light you saw that some terrible incident had occurred?"
"Exactly."
"You at once rang for help?"
"Yes."
"And it arrived very speedily?"
"Within a minute or so."
"And yet when they arrived they found that the candle was out and thatthe lamp had been lighted. That seems very remarkable."
Again Barker showed some signs of indecision. "I don't see that it wasremarkable, Mr. Holmes," he answered after a pause. "The candle threw avery bad light. My first thought was to get a better one. The lamp wason the table; so I lit it."
"And blew out the candle?"
"Exactly."
Holmes asked no further question, and Barker, with a deliberate lookfrom one to the other of us, which had, as it seemed to me, somethingof defiance in it, turned and left the room.
Inspector MacDonald had sent up a note to the effect that he would waitupon Mrs. Douglas in her room; but she had replied that she would meetus in the dining room. She entered now, a tall and beautiful woman ofthirty, reserved and self-possessed to a remarkable degree, verydifferent from the tragic and distracted figure I had pictured. It istrue that her face was pale and drawn, like that of one who has endureda great shock; but her manner was composed, and the finely moulded handwhich she rested upon the edge of the table was as steady as my own.Her sad, appealing eyes travelled from one to the other of us with acuriously inquisitive expression. That questioning gaze transformeditself suddenly into abrupt speech.
"Have you found anything out yet?" she asked.
Was it my imagination that there was an undertone of fear rather thanof hope in the question?
"We have taken every possible step, Mrs. Douglas," said the inspector."You may rest assured that nothing will be neglected."
"Spare no money," she said in a dead, even tone. "It is my desire thatevery possible effort should be made."
"Perhaps you can tell us something which may throw some light upon thematter."
"I fear not; but all I know is at your service."
"We have heard from Mr. Cecil Barker that you did not actuallysee--that you were never in the room where the tragedy occurred?"
"No, he turned me back upon the stairs. He begged me to return to myroom."
"Quite so. You had heard the shot, and you had at once come down."
"I put on my dressing gown and then came down."
"How long was it after hearing the shot that you were stopped on thestair by Mr. Barker?"
"It may have been a couple of minutes. It is so hard to reckon time atsuch a moment. He implored me not to go on. He assured me that I coulddo nothing. Then Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, led me upstairs again. Itwas all like some dreadful dream."
"Can you give us any idea how long your husband had been downstairsbefore you heard the shot?"
"No, I cannot say. He went from his dressing room, and I did not hearhim go. He did the round of the house every night, for he was nervousof fire. It is the only thing that I have ever known him nervous of."
"That is just the point which I want to come to, Mrs. Douglas. You haveknown your husband only in England, have you not?"
"Yes, we have been married five years."
"Have you heard him speak of anything which occurred in America andmight bring some danger upon him?"
Mrs. Douglas thought earnestly before she answered. "Yes." she said atlast, "I have always felt that there was a danger hanging over him. Herefused to discuss it with me. It was not from want of confidence inme--there was the most complete love and confidence between us--but itwas out of his desire to keep all alarm away from me. He thought Ishould brood over it if I knew all, and so he was silent."
"How did you know it, then?"
Mrs. Douglas's face lit with a quick smil
e. "Can a husband ever carryabout a secret all his life and a woman who loves him have no suspicionof it? I knew it by his refusal to talk about some episodes in hisAmerican life. I knew it by certain precautions he took. I knew it bycertain words he let fall. I knew it by the way he looked at unexpectedstrangers. I was perfectly certain that he had some powerful enemies,that he believed they were on his track, and that he was always on hisguard against them. I was so sure of it that for years I have beenterrified if ever he came home later than was expected."
"Might I ask," asked Holmes, "what the words were which attracted yourattention?"
"The Valley of Fear," the lady answered. "That was an expression he hasused when I questioned him. 'I have been in the Valley of Fear. I amnot out of it yet.'--'Are we never to get out of the Valley of Fear?' Ihave asked him when I have seen him more serious than usual. 'SometimesI think that we never shall,' he has answered."
"Surely you asked him what he meant by the Valley of Fear?"
"I did; but his face would become very grave and he would shake hishead. 'It is bad enough that one of us should have been in its shadow,'he said. 'Please God it shall never fall upon you!' It was some realvalley in which he had lived and in which something terrible hadoccurred to him, of that I am certain; but I can tell you no more."
"And he never mentioned any names?"
"Yes, he was delirious with fever once when he had his hunting accidentthree years ago. Then I remember that there was a name that camecontinually to his lips. He spoke it with anger and a sort of horror.McGinty was the name--Bodymaster McGinty. I asked him when he recoveredwho Bodymaster McGinty was, and whose body he was master of. 'Never ofmine, thank God!' he answered with a laugh, and that was all I couldget from him. But there is a connection between Bodymaster McGinty andthe Valley of Fear."
"There is one other point," said Inspector MacDonald. "You met Mr.Douglas in a boarding house in London, did you not, and became engagedto him there? Was there any romance, anything secret or mysterious,about the wedding?"
"There was romance. There is always romance. There was nothingmysterious."
"He had no rival?"
"No, I was quite free."
"You have heard, no doubt, that his wedding ring has been taken. Doesthat suggest anything to you? Suppose that some enemy of his old lifehad tracked him down and committed this crime, what possible reasoncould he have for taking his wedding ring?"
For an instant I could have sworn that the faintest shadow of a smileflickered over the woman's lips.
"I really cannot tell," she answered. "It is certainly a mostextraordinary thing."
"Well, we will not detain you any longer, and we are sorry to have putyou to this trouble at such a time," said the inspector. "There aresome other points, no doubt; but we can refer to you as they arise."
She rose, and I was again conscious of that quick, questioning glancewith which she had just surveyed us. "What impression has my evidencemade upon you?" The question might as well have been spoken. Then, witha bow, she swept from the room.
"She's a beautiful woman--a very beautiful woman," said MacDonaldthoughtfully, after the door had closed behind her. "This man Barkerhas certainly been down here a good deal. He is a man who might beattractive to a woman. He admits that the dead man was jealous, andmaybe he knew best himself what cause he had for jealousy. Then there'sthat wedding ring. You can't get past that. The man who tears a weddingring off a dead man's--What do you say to it, Mr. Holmes?"
My friend had sat with his head upon his hands, sunk in the deepestthought. Now he rose and rang the bell. "Ames," he said, when thebutler entered, "where is Mr. Cecil Barker now?"
"I'll see, sir."
He came back in a moment to say that Barker was in the garden.
"Can you remember, Ames, what Mr. Barker had on his feet last nightwhen you joined him in the study?"
"Yes, Mr. Holmes. He had a pair of bedroom slippers. I brought him hisboots when he went for the police."
"Where are the slippers now?"
"They are still under the chair in the hall."
"Very good, Ames. It is, of course, important for us to know whichtracks may be Mr. Barker's and which from outside."
"Yes, sir. I may say that I noticed that the slippers were stained withblood--so indeed were my own."
"That is natural enough, considering the condition of the room. Verygood, Ames. We will ring if we want you."
A few minutes later we were in the study. Holmes had brought with himthe carpet slippers from the hall. As Ames had observed, the soles ofboth were dark with blood.
"Strange!" murmured Holmes, as he stood in the light of the window andexamined them minutely. "Very strange indeed!"
Stooping with one of his quick feline pounces, he placed the slipperupon the blood mark on the sill. It exactly corresponded. He smiled insilence at his colleagues.
The inspector was transfigured with excitement. His native accentrattled like a stick upon railings.
"Man," he cried, "there's not a doubt of it! Barker has just marked thewindow himself. It's a good deal broader than any bootmark. I mind thatyou said it was a splay-foot, and here's the explanation. But what'sthe game, Mr. Holmes--what's the game?"
"Ay, what's the game?" my friend repeated thoughtfully.
White Mason chuckled and rubbed his fat hands together in hisprofessional satisfaction. "I said it was a snorter!" he cried. "And areal snorter it is!"
Chapter 6
A Dawning Light
The three detectives had many matters of detail into which to inquire;so I returned alone to our modest quarters at the village inn. Butbefore doing so I took a stroll in the curious old-world garden whichflanked the house. Rows of very ancient yew trees cut into strangedesigns girded it round. Inside was a beautiful stretch of lawn with anold sundial in the middle, the whole effect so soothing and restfulthat it was welcome to my somewhat jangled nerves.
In that deeply peaceful atmosphere one could forget, or remember onlyas some fantastic nightmare, that darkened study with the sprawling,bloodstained figure on the floor. And yet, as I strolled round it andtried to steep my soul in its gentle balm, a strange incident occurred,which brought me back to the tragedy and left a sinister impression inmy mind.
I have said that a decoration of yew trees circled the garden. At theend farthest from the house they thickened into a continuous hedge. Onthe other side of this hedge, concealed from the eyes of anyoneapproaching from the direction of the house, there was a stone seat. AsI approached the spot I was aware of voices, some remark in the deeptones of a man, answered by a little ripple of feminine laughter.
An instant later I had come round the end of the hedge and my eyes litupon Mrs. Douglas and the man Barker before they were aware of mypresence. Her appearance gave me a shock. In the dining-room she hadbeen demure and discreet. Now all pretense of grief had passed awayfrom her. Her eyes shone with the joy of living, and her face stillquivered with amusement at some remark of her companion. He satforward, his hands clasped and his forearms on his knees, with ananswering smile upon his bold, handsome face. In an instant--but it wasjust one instant too late--they resumed their solemn masks as my figurecame into view. A hurried word or two passed between them, and thenBarker rose and came towards me.
"Excuse me, sir," said he, "but am I addressing Dr. Watson?"
I bowed with a coldness which showed, I dare say, very plainly theimpression which had been produced upon my mind.
"We thought that it was probably you, as your friendship with Mr.Sherlock Holmes is so well known. Would you mind coming over andspeaking to Mrs. Douglas for one instant?"
I followed him with a dour face. Very clearly I could see in my mind'seye that shattered figure on the floor. Here within a few hours of thetragedy were his wife and his nearest friend laughing together behind abush in the garden which had been his. I greeted the lady with reserve.I had grieved with her grief in the dining-room. Now I met herappealing gaze with an unresponsive eye.
"I fear that you think me callous and hard-hearted." said she.
I shrugged my shoulders. "It is no business of mine," said I.
"Perhaps some day you will do me justice. If you only realized--"
"There is no need why Dr. Watson should realize," said Barker quickly."As he has himself said, it is no possible business of his."
"Exactly," said I, "and so I will beg leave to resume my walk."
"One moment, Dr. Watson," cried the woman in a pleading voice. "Thereis one question which you can answer with more authority than anyoneelse in the world, and it may make a very great difference to me. Youknow Mr. Holmes and his relations with the police better than anyoneelse can. Supposing that a matter were brought confidentially to hisknowledge, is it absolutely necessary that he should pass it on to thedetectives?"
"Yes, that's it," said Barker eagerly. "Is he on his own or is heentirely in with them?"
"I really don't know that I should be justified in discussing such apoint."
"I beg--I implore that you will, Dr. Watson! I assure you that you willbe helping us--helping me greatly if you will guide us on that point."
There was such a ring of sincerity in the woman's voice that for theinstant I forgot all about her levity and was moved only to do her will.
"Mr. Holmes is an independent investigator," I said. "He is his ownmaster, and would act as his own judgment directed. At the same time,he would naturally feel loyalty towards the officials who were workingon the same case, and he would not conceal from them anything whichwould help them in bringing a criminal to justice. Beyond this I cansay nothing, and I would refer you to Mr. Holmes himself if you wantedfuller information."
So saying I raised my hat and went upon my way, leaving them stillseated behind that concealing hedge. I looked back as I rounded the farend of it, and saw that they were still talking very earnestlytogether, and, as they were gazing after me, it was clear that it wasour interview that was the subject of their debate.
"I wish none of their confidences," said Holmes, when I reported to himwhat had occurred. He had spent the whole afternoon at the Manor Housein consultation with his two colleagues, and returned about five with aravenous appetite for a high tea which I had ordered for him. "Noconfidences, Watson; for they are mighty awkward if it comes to anarrest for conspiracy and murder."
"You think it will come to that?"
He was in his most cheerful and debonair humour. "My dear Watson, whenI have exterminated that fourth egg I shall be ready to put you intouch with the whole situation. I don't say that we have fathomedit--far from it--but when we have traced the missing dumb-bell--"
"The dumb-bell!"
"Dear me, Watson, is it possible that you have not penetrated the factthat the case hangs upon the missing dumb-bell? Well, well, you neednot be downcast; for between ourselves I don't think that eitherInspector Mac or the excellent local practitioner has grasped theoverwhelming importance of this incident. One dumb-bell, Watson!Consider an athlete with one dumb-bell! Picture to yourself theunilateral development, the imminent danger of a spinal curvature.Shocking, Watson, shocking!"
He sat with his mouth full of toast and his eyes sparkling withmischief, watching my intellectual entanglement. The mere sight of hisexcellent appetite was an assurance of success, for I had very clearrecollections of days and nights without a thought of food, when hisbaffled mind had chafed before some problem while his thin, eagerfeatures became more attenuated with the asceticism of complete mentalconcentration. Finally he lit his pipe, and sitting in the inglenook ofthe old village inn he talked slowly and at random about his case,rather as one who thinks aloud than as one who makes a consideredstatement.
"A lie, Watson--a great, big, thumping, obtrusive, uncompromisinglie--that's what meets us on the threshold! There is our startingpoint. The whole story told by Barker is a lie. But Barker's story iscorroborated by Mrs. Douglas. Therefore she is lying also. They areboth lying, and in a conspiracy. So now we have the clear problem. Whyare they lying, and what is the truth which they are trying so hard toconceal? Let us try, Watson, you and I, if we can get behind the lieand reconstruct the truth.
"How do I know that they are lying? Because it is a clumsy fabricationwhich simply could not be true. Consider! According to the story givento us, the assassin had less than a minute after the murder had beencommitted to take that ring, which was under another ring, from thedead man's finger, to replace the other ring--a thing which he wouldsurely never have done--and to put that singular card beside hisvictim. I say that this was obviously impossible.
"You may argue--but I have too much respect for your judgment, Watson,to think that you will do so--that the ring may have been taken beforethe man was killed. The fact that the candle had been lit only a shorttime shows that there had been no lengthy interview. Was Douglas, fromwhat we hear of his fearless character, a man who would be likely togive up his wedding ring at such short notice, or could we conceive ofhis giving it up at all? No, no, Watson, the assassin was alone withthe dead man for some time with the lamp lit. Of that I have no doubtat all.
"But the gunshot was apparently the cause of death. Therefore the shotmust have been fired some time earlier than we are told. But therecould be no mistake about such a matter as that. We are in thepresence, therefore, of a deliberate conspiracy upon the part of thetwo people who heard the gunshot--of the man Barker and of the womanDouglas. When on the top of this I
am able to show that the blood markon the windowsill was deliberately placed there by Barker, in order togive a false clue to the police, you will admit that the case growsdark against him.
"Now we have to ask ourselves at what hour the murder actually didoccur. Up to half-past ten the servants were moving about the house; soit was certainly not before that time. At a quarter to eleven they hadall gone to their rooms with the exception of Ames, who was in thepantry. I have been trying some experiments after you left us thisafternoon, and I find that no noise which MacDonald can make in thestudy can penetrate to me in the pantry when the doors are all shut.
"It is otherwise, however, from the housekeeper's room. It is not sofar down the corridor, and from it I could vaguely hear a voice when itwas very loudly raised. The sound from a shotgun is to some extentmuffled when the discharge is at very close range, as it undoubtedlywas in this instance. It would not be very loud, and yet in the silenceof the night it should have easily penetrated to Mrs. Allen's room. Sheis, as she has told us, somewhat deaf; but none the less she mentionedin her evidence that she did hear something like a door slamming halfan hour before the alarm was given. Half an hour before the alarm wasgiven would be a quarter to eleven. I have no doubt that what she heardwas the report of the gun, and that this was the real instant of themurder.
"If this is so, we have now to determine what Barker and Mrs. Douglas,presuming that they are not the actual murderers, could have been doingfrom quarter to eleven, when the sound of the shot brought them down,until quarter past eleven, when they rang the bell and summoned theservants. What were they doing, and why did they not instantly give thealarm? That is the question which faces us, and when it has beenanswered we shall surely have gone some way to solve our problem."
"I am convinced myself," said I, "that there is an understandingbetween those two people. She must be a heartless creature to sitlaughing at some jest within a few hours of her husband's murder."
"Exactly. She does not shine as a wife even in her own account of whatoccurred. I am not a whole-souled admirer of womankind, as you areaware, Watson, but my experience of life has taught me that there arefew wives, having any regard for their husbands, who would let anyman's spoken word stand between them and that husband's dead body.Should I ever marry, Watson, I should hope to inspire my wife with somefeeling which would prevent her from being walked off by a housekeeperwhen my corpse was lying within a few yards of her. It was badlystage-managed; for even the rawest investigators must be struck by theabsence of the usual feminine ululation. If there had been nothingelse, this incident alone would have suggested a prearranged conspiracyto my mind."
"You think then, definitely, that Barker and Mrs. Douglas are guilty ofthe murder?"
"There is an appalling directness about your questions, Watson," saidHolmes, shaking his pipe at me. "They come at me like bullets. If youput it that Mrs. Douglas and Barker know the truth about the murder,and are conspiring to conceal it, then I can give you a whole-souledanswer. I am sure they do. But your more deadly proposition is not soclear. Let us for a moment consider the difficulties which stand in theway.
"We will suppose that this couple are united by the bonds of a guiltylove, and that they have determined to get rid of the man who standsbetween them. It is a large supposition; for discreet inquiry amongservants and others has failed to corroborate it in any way. On thecontrary, there is a good deal of evidence that the Douglases were veryattached to each other."
"That, I am sure, cannot be true." said I, thinking of the beautifulsmiling face in the garden.
"Well at least they gave that impression. However, we will suppose thatthey are an extraordinarily astute couple, who deceive everyone uponthis point, and conspire to murder the husband. He happens to be a manover whose head some danger hangs--"
"We have only their word for that."
Holmes looked thoughtful. "I see, Watson. You are sketching out atheory by which everything they say from the beginning is false.According to your idea, there was never any hidden menace, or secretsociety, or Valley of Fear, or Boss MacSomebody, or anything else.Well, that is a good sweeping generalization. Let us see what thatbrings us to. They invent this theory to account for the crime. Theythen play up to the idea by leaving this bicycle in the park as proofof the existence of some outsider. The stain on the windowsill conveysthe same idea. So does the card on the body, which might have beenprepared in the house. That all fits into your hypothesis, Watson. Butnow we come on the nasty, angular, uncompromising bits which won't slipinto their places. Why a cut-off shotgun of all weapons--and anAmerican one at that? How could they be so sure that the sound of itwould not bring someone on to them? It's a mere chance as it is thatMrs. Allen did not start out to inquire for the slamming door. Why didyour guilty couple do all this, Watson?"
"I confess that I can't explain it."
"Then again, if a woman and her lover conspire to murder a husband, arethey going to advertise their guilt by ostentatiously removing hiswedding ring after his death? Does that strike you as very probable,Watson?"
"No, it does not."
"And once again, if the thought of leaving a bicycle concealed outsidehad occurred to you, would it really have seemed worth doing when thedullest detective would naturally say this is an obvious blind, as thebicycle is the first thing which the fugitive needed in order to makehis escape."
"I can conceive of no explanation."
"And yet there should be no combination of events for which the wit ofman cannot conceive an explanation. Simply as a mental exercise,without any assertion that it is true, let me indicate a possible lineof thought. It is, I admit, mere imagination; but how often isimagination the mother of truth?
"We will suppose that there was a guilty secret, a really shamefulsecret in the life of this man Douglas. This leads to his murder bysomeone who is, we will suppose, an avenger, someone from outside. Thisavenger, for some reason which I confess I am still at a loss toexplain, took the dead man's wedding ring. The vendetta mightconceivably date back to the man's first marriage, and the ring betaken for some such reason.
"Before this avenger got away, Barker and the wife had reached theroom. The assassin convinced them that any attempt to arrest him wouldlead to the publication of some hideous scandal. They were converted tothis idea, and preferred to let him go. For this purpose they probablylowered the bridge, which can be done quite noiselessly, and thenraised it again. He made his escape, and for some reason thought thathe could do so more safely on foot than on the bicycle. He thereforeleft his machine where it would not be discovered until he had gotsafely away. So far we are within the bounds of possibility, are wenot?"
"Well, it is possible, no doubt," said I, with some reserve.
"We have to remember, Watson, that whatever occurred is certainlysomething very extraordinary. Well, now, to continue our supposititiouscase, the couple--not necessarily a guilty couple--realize after themurderer is gone that they have placed themselves in a position inwhich it may be difficult for them to prove that they did notthemselves either do the deed or connive at it. They rapidly and ratherclumsily met the situation. The mark was put by Barker's bloodstainedslipper upon the window-sill to suggest how the fugitive got away. Theyobviously were the two who must have heard the sound of the gun; sothey gave the alarm exactly as they would have done, but a good halfhour after the event."
"And how do you propose to prove all this?"
"Well, if there were an outsider, he may be traced and taken. Thatwould be the most effective of all proofs. But if not--well, theresources of science are far from being exhausted. I think that anevening alone in that study would help me much."
"An evening alone!"
"I propose to go up there presently. I have arranged it with theestimable Ames, who is by no means whole-hearted about Barker. I shallsit in that room and see if its atmosphere brings me inspiration. I'm abeliever in the genius loci. You smile, Friend Watson. Well, we shallsee. By the way, you have that big umbrella of your
s, have you not?"
"It is here."
"Well, I'll borrow that if I may."
"Certainly--but what a wretched weapon! If there is danger--"
"Nothing serious, my dear Watson, or I should certainly ask for yourassistance. But I'll take the umbrella. At present I am only awaitingthe return of our colleagues from Tunbridge Wells, where they are atpresent engaged in trying for a likely owner to the bicycle."
It was nightfall before Inspector MacDonald and White Mason came backfrom their expedition, and they arrived exultant, reporting a greatadvance in our investigation.
"Man, I'll admeet that I had my doubts if there was ever an outsider,"said MacDonald, "but that's all past now. We've had the bicycleidentified, and we have a description of our man; so that's a long stepon our journey."
"It sounds to me like the beginning of the end," said Holmes. "I'm sureI congratulate you both with all my heart."
"Well, I started from the fact that Mr. Douglas had seemed disturbedsince the day before, when he had been at Tunbridge Wells. It was atTunbridge Wells then that he had become conscious of some danger. Itwas clear, therefore, that if a man had come over with a bicycle it wasfrom Tunbridge Wells that he might be expected to have come. We tookthe bicycle over with us and showed it at the hotels. It was identifiedat once by the manager of the Eagle Commercial as belonging to a mannamed Hargrave, who had taken a room there two days before. Thisbicycle and a small valise were his whole belongings. He had registeredhis name as coming from London, but had given no address. The valisewas London made, and the contents were British; but the man himself wasundoubtedly an American."
"Well, well," said Holmes gleefully, "you have indeed done some solidwork while I have been sitting spinning theories with my friend! It's alesson in being practical, Mr. Mac."
"Ay, it's just that, Mr. Holmes," said the inspector with satisfaction.
"But this may all fit in with your theories," I remarked.
"That may or may not be. But let us hear the end, Mr. Mac. Was therenothing to identify this man?"
"So little that it was evident that he had carefully guarded himselfagainst identification. There were no papers or letters, and no markingupon the clothes. A cycle map of the county lay on his bedroom table.He had left the hotel after breakfast yesterday morning on his bicycle,and no more was heard of him until our inquiries."
"That's what puzzles me, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason. "If the fellowdid not want the hue and cry raised over him, one would imagine that hewould have returned and remained at the hotel as an inoffensivetourist. As it is, he must know that he will be reported to the policeby the hotel manager and that his disappearance will be connected withthe murder."
"So one would imagine. Still, he has been justified of his wisdom up todate, at any rate, since he has not been taken. But hisdescription--what of that?"
MacDonald referred to his notebook. "Here we have it so far as theycould give it. They don't seem to have taken any very particular stockof him; but still the porter, the clerk, and the chambermaid are allagreed that this about covers the points. He was a man about five footnine in height, fifty or so years of age, his hair slightly grizzled, agrayish moustache, a curved nose, and a face which all of themdescribed as fierce and forbidding."
"Well, bar the expression, that might almost be a description ofDouglas himself," said Holmes. "He is just over fifty, with grizzledhair and moustache, and about the same height. Did you get anythingelse?"
"He was dressed in a heavy gray suit with a reefer jacket, and he worea short yellow overcoat and a soft cap."
"What about the shotgun?"
"It is less than two feet long. It could very well have fitted into hisvalise. He could have carried it inside his overcoat withoutdifficulty."
"And how do you consider that all this bears upon the general case?"
"Well, Mr. Holmes," said MacDonald, "when we have got our man--and youmay be sure that I had his description on the wires within five minutesof hearing it--we shall be better able to judge. But, even as itstands, we have surely gone a long way. We know that an Americancalling himself Hargrave came to Tunbridge Wells two days ago withbicycle and valise. In the latter was a sawed-off shotgun; so he camewith the deliberate purpose of crime. Yesterday morning he set off forthis place on his bicycle, with his gun concealed in his overcoat. Noone saw him arrive, so far as we can learn; but he need not passthrough the village to reach the park gates, and there are manycyclists upon the road. Presumably he at once concealed his cycle amongthe laurels where it was found, and possibly lurked there himself, withhis eye on the house, waiting for Mr. Douglas to come out. The shotgunis a strange weapon to use inside a house; but he had intended to useit outside, and there it has very obvious advantages, as it would beimpossible to miss with it, and the sound of shots is so common in anEnglish sporting neighbourhood that no particular notice would betaken."
"That is all very clear," said Holmes.
"Well, Mr. Douglas did not appear. What was he to do next? He left hisbicycle and approached the house in the twilight. He found the bridgedown and no one about. He took his chance, intending, no doubt, to makesome excuse if he met anyone. He met no one. He slipped into the firstroom that he saw, and concealed himself behind the curtain. Thence hecould see the drawbridge go up, and he knew that his only escape wasthrough the moat. He waited until quarter-past eleven, when Mr. Douglasupon his usual nightly round came into the room. He shot him andescaped, as arranged. He was aware that the bicycle would be describedby the hotel people and be a clue against him; so he left it there andmade his way by some other means to London or to some safe hiding placewhich he had already arranged. How is that, Mr. Holmes?"
"Well, Mr. Mac, it is very good and very clear so far as it goes. Thatis your end of the story. My end is that the crime was committed halfan hour earlier than reported; that Mrs. Douglas and Barker are both ina conspiracy to conceal something; that they aided the murderer'sescape--or at least that they reached the room before he escaped--andthat they fabricated evidence of his escape through the window, whereasin all probability they had themselves let him go by lowering thebridge. That's my reading of the first half."
The two detectives shook their heads.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, if this is true, we only tumble out of one mysteryinto another," said the London inspector.
"And in some ways a worse one," added White Mason. "The lady has neverbeen in America in all her life. What possible connection could shehave with an American assassin which would cause her to shelter him?"
"I freely admit the difficulties," said Holmes. "I propose to make alittle investigation of my own to-night, and it is just possible thatit may contribute something to the common cause."
"Can we help you, Mr. Holmes?"
"No, no! Darkness and Dr. Watson's umbrella--my wants are simple. AndAmes, the faithful Ames, no doubt he will stretch a point for me. Allmy lines of thought lead me back invariably to the one basicquestion--why should an athletic man develop his frame upon sounnatural an instrument as a single dumb-bell?"
It was late that night when Holmes returned from his solitaryexcursion. We slept in a double-bedded room, which was the best thatthe little country inn could do for us. I was already asleep when I waspartly awakened by his entrance.
"Well, Holmes," I murmured, "have you found anything out?"
He stood beside me in silence, his candle in his hand. Then the tall,lean figure inclined towards me. "I say, Watson," he whispered, "wouldyou be afraid to sleep in the same room with a lunatic, a man withsoftening of the brain, an idiot whose mind has lost its grip?"
"Not in the least," I answered in astonishment.
"Ah, that's lucky," he said, and not another word would he utter thatnight.
Chapter 7
The Solution
Next morning, after breakfast, we found Inspector MacDonald and WhiteMason seated in close consultation in the small parlour of the localpolice sergeant. On the table in front of them were piled a number ofletters and telegrams, which they were carefully sorting and docketing.Three had been placed on one side.
"Still on the track of the elusive bicyclist?" Holmes asked cheerfully."What is the latest news of the ruffian?"
MacDonald pointed ruefully to his heap of correspondence.
"He is at present reported from Leicester, Nottingham, Southampton,Derby, East Ham, Richmond, and fourteen other places. In three ofthem--East Ham, Leicester, and Liverpool--there is a clear case againsthim, and he has actually been arrested. The country seems to be full ofthe fugitives with yellow coats."
"Dear me!" said Holmes sympathetically. "Now, Mr. Mac and you, Mr.White Mason, I wish to give you a very earnest piece of advice. When Iwent into this case with you I bargained, as you will no doubtremember, that I should not present you with half-proved theories, butthat I should retain and work out my own ideas until I had satisfiedmyself that they were correct. For this reason I am not at the presentmoment telling you all that is in my mind. On the other hand, I saidthat I would play the game fairly by you, and I do not think it is afair game to allow you for one unnecessary moment to waste yourenergies upon a profitless task. Therefore I am here to advise you thismorning, and my advice to you is summed up in three words--abandon thecase."
MacDonald and White Mason stared in amazement at their celebratedcolleague.
"You consider it hopeless!" cried the inspector.
"I consider your case to be hopeless. I do not consider that it ishopeless to arrive at the truth."
"But this cyclist. He is not an invention. We have his description, hisvalise, his bicycle. The fellow must be somewhere. Why should we notget him?"
"Yes, yes, no doubt he is somewhere, and no doubt we shall get him; butI would not have you waste your energies in East Ham or Liverpool. I amsure that we can find some shorter cut to a result."
"You are holding something back. It's hardly fair of you, Mr. Holmes."The inspector was annoyed.
"You know my methods of work, Mr. Mac. But I will hold it back for theshortest time possible. I only wish to verify my details in one way,which can very readily be done, and then I make my bow and return toLondon, leaving my results entirely at your service. I owe you too muchto act otherwise; for in all my experience I cannot recall any moresingular and interesting study."
"This is clean beyond me, Mr. Holmes. We saw you when we returned fromTunbridge Wells last night, and you were in general agreement with ourresults. What has happened since then to give you a completely new ideaof the case?"
"Well, since you ask me, I spent, as I told you that I would, somehours last night at the Manor House."
"Well, what happened?"
"Ah, I can only give you a very general answer to that for the moment.By the way, I have been reading a short but clear and interestingaccount of the old building, purchasable at the modest sum of one pennyfrom the local tobacconist."
Here Holmes drew a small tract, embellished with a rude engraving ofthe ancient Manor House, from his waistcoat pocket.
"It immensely adds to the zest of an investigation, my dear Mr. Mac,when one is in conscious sympathy with the historical atmosphere ofone's surroundings. Don't look so impatient; for I assure you that evenso bald an account as this raises some sort of picture of the past inone's mind. Permit me to give you a sample. 'Erected in the fifth yearof the reign of James I, and standing upon the site of a much olderbuilding, the Manor House of Birlstone presents one of the finestsurviving examples of the moated Jacobean residence--'"
"You are making fools of us, Mr. Holmes!"
"Tut, tut, Mr. Mac!--the first sign of temper I have detected in you.Well, I won't read it verbatim, since you feel so strongly upon thesubject. But when I tell you that there is some account of the takingof the place by a parliamentary colonel in 1644, of the concealment ofCharles for several days in the course of the Civil War, and finally ofa visit there by the second George, you will admit that there arevarious associations of interest connected with this ancient house."
"I don't doubt it, Mr. Holmes; but that is no business of ours."
"Is it not? Is it not? Breadth of view, my dear Mr. Mac, is one of theessentials of our profession. The interplay of ideas and the obliqueuses of knowledge are often of extraordinary interest. You will excusethese remarks from one who, though a mere connoisseur of crime, isstill rather older and perhaps more experienced than yourself."
"I'm the first to admit that," said the detective heartily. "You get toyour point, I admit; but you have such a deuced round-the-corner way ofdoing it."
"Well, well, I'll drop past history and get down to present-day facts.I called last night, as I have already said, at the Manor House. I didnot see either Barker or Mrs. Douglas. I saw no necessity to disturbthem; but I was pleased to hear that the lady was not visibly piningand that she had partaken of an excellent dinner. My visit wasspecially made to the good Mr. Ames, with whom I exchanged someamiabilities, which culminated in his allowing me, without reference toanyone else, to sit alone for a time in the study."
"What! With that?" I ejaculated.
"No, no, everything is now in order. You gave permission for that, Mr.Mac, as I am informed. The room was in its normal state, and in it Ipassed an instructive quarter of an hour."
"What were you doing?"
"Well, not to make a mystery of so simple a matter, I was looking forthe missing dumb-bell. It has always bulked rather large in my estimateof the case. I ended by finding it."
"Where?"
"Ah, there we come to the edge of the unexplored. Let me go a littlefurther, a very little further, and I will promise that you shall shareeverything that I know."
"Well, we're bound to take you on your own terms," said the inspector;"but when it comes to telling us to abandon the case--why in the nameof goodness should we abandon the case?"
"For the simple reason, my dear Mr. Mac, that you have not got thefirst idea what it is that you are investigating."
"We are investigating the murder of Mr. John Douglas of BirlstoneManor."
"Yes, yes, so you are. But don't trouble to trace the mysteriousgentleman upon the bicycle. I assure you that it won't help you."
"Then what do you suggest that we do?"
"I will tell you exactly what to do, if you will do it."
"Well, I'm bound to say I've always found you had reason behind allyour queer ways. I'll do what you advise."
"And you, Mr. White Mason?"
The country detective looked helplessly from one to the other. Holmesand his methods were new to him. "Well, if it is good enough for theinspector, it is good enough for me," he said at last.
"Capital!" said Holmes. "Well, then, I should recommend a nice, cheerycountry walk for both of you. They tell me that the views fromBirlstone Ridge over the Weald are very remarkable. No doubt lunchcould be got at some suitable hostelry; though my ignorance of thecountry prevents me from recommending one. In the evening, tired buthappy--"
"Man, this is getting past a joke!" cried MacDonald, rising angrilyfrom his chair.
"Well, well, spend the day as you like," said Holmes, patting himcheerfully upon the shoulder. "Do what you like and go where you will,but meet me here before dusk without fail--without fail, Mr. Mac."
"That sounds more like sanity."
"All of it was excellent advice; but I don't insist, so long as you arehere when I need you. But now, before we part, I want you to write anote to Mr. Barker."
"Well?"
"I'll dictate it, if you like. Ready?
"Dear Sir:
"It has struck me that it is our duty to drain the moat, in      the hope that we may find some--"
"It's impossible," said the inspector. "I've made inquiry."

; "Tut, tut! My dear sir, please do what I ask you."
"Well, go on."
"--in the hope that we may find something which may bear      upon our investigation. I have made arrangements, and the      workmen will be at work early to-morrow morning diverting      the stream--"
"Impossible!"
"--diverting the stream; so I thought it best to explain      matters beforehand.
"Now sign that, and send it by hand about four o'clock. At that hour weshall meet again in this room. Until then we may each do what we like;for I can assure you that this inquiry has come to a definite pause."
Evening was drawing in when we reassembled. Holmes was very serious inhis manner, myself curious, and the detectives obviously critical andannoyed.
"Well, gentlemen," said my friend gravely, "I am asking you now to puteverything to the test with me, and you will judge for yourselveswhether the observations I have made justify the conclusions to which Ihave come. It is a chill evening, and I do not know how long ourexpedition may last; so I beg that you will wear your warmest coats. Itis of the first importance that we should be in our places before itgrows dark; so with your permission we shall get started at once."
We passed along the outer bounds of the Manor House park until we cameto a place where there was a gap in the rails which fenced it. Throughthis we slipped, and then in the gathering gloom we followed Holmesuntil we had reached a shrubbery which lies nearly opposite to the maindoor and the drawbridge. The latter had not been raised. Holmescrouched down behind the screen of laurels, and we all three followedhis example.
"Well, what are we to do now?" asked MacDonald with some gruffness.
"Possess our souls in patience and make as little noise as possible,"Holmes answered.
"What are we here for at all? I really think that you might treat uswith more frankness."
Holmes laughed. "Watson insists that I am the dramatist in real life,"said he. "Some touch of the artist wells up within me, and callsinsistently for a well-staged performance. Surely our profession, Mr.Mac, would be a drab and sordid one if we did not sometimes set thescene so as to glorify our results. The blunt accusation, the brutaltap upon the shoulder--what can one make of such a denouement? But thequick inference, the subtle trap, the clever forecast of coming events,the triumphant vindication of bold theories--are these not the prideand the justification of our life's work? At the present moment youthrill with the glamour of the situation and the anticipation of thehunt. Where would be that thrill if I had been as definite as atimetable? I only ask a little patience, Mr. Mac, and all will be clearto you."
"Well, I hope the pride and justification and the rest of it will comebefore we all get our death of cold," said the London detective withcomic resignation.
We all had good reason to join in the aspiration; for our vigil was along and bitter one. Slowly the shadows darkened over the long, sombreface of the old house. A cold, damp reek from the moat chilled us tothe bones and set our teeth chattering. There was a single lamp overthe gateway and a steady globe of light in the fatal study. Everythingelse was dark and still.
"How long is this to last?" asked the inspector finally. "And what isit we are watching for?"
"I have no more notion than you how long it is to last," Holmesanswered with some asperity. "If criminals would always schedule theirmovements like railway trains, it would certainly be more convenientfor all of us. As to what it is we--Well, that's what we are watchingfor!"
As he spoke the bright, yellow light in the study was obscured bysomebody passing to and fro before it. The laurels among which we laywere immediately opposite the window and not more than a hundred feetfrom it. Presently it was thrown open with a whining of hinges, and wecould dimly see the dark outline of a man's head and shoulders lookingout into the gloom. For some minutes he peered forth in furtive,stealthy fashion, as one who wishes to be assured that he isunobserved. Then he leaned forward, and in the intense silence we wereaware of the soft lapping of agitated water. He seemed to be stirringup the moat with something which he held in his hand. Then suddenly hehauled something in as a fisherman lands a fish--some large, roundobject which obscured the light as it was dragged through the opencasement.
"Now!" cried Holmes. "Now!"
We were all upon our feet, staggering after him with our stiffenedlimbs, while he ran swiftly across the bridge and rang violently at thebell. There was the rasping of bolts from the other side, and theamazed Ames stood in the entrance. Holmes brushed him aside without aword and, followed by all of us, rushed into the room which had beenoccupied by the man whom we had been watching.
The oil lamp on the table represented the glow which we had seen fromoutside. It was now in the hand of Cecil Barker, who held it towards usas we entered. Its light shone upon his strong, resolute, clean-shavedface and his menacing eyes.
"What the devil is the meaning of all this?" he cried. "What are youafter, anyhow?"
Holmes took a swift glance round, and then pounced upon a sodden bundletied together with cord which lay where it had been thrust under thewriting table.
"This is what we are after, Mr. Barker--this bundle, weighted with adumb-bell, which you have just raised from the bottom of the moat."
Barker stared at Holmes with amazement in his face. "How in thundercame you to know anything about it?" he asked.
"Simply that I put it there."
"You put it there! You!"
"Perhaps I should have said 'replaced it there,'" said Holmes. "Youwill remember, Inspector MacDonald, that I was somewhat struck by theabsence of a dumb-bell. I drew your attention to it; but with thepressure of other events you had hardly the time to give it theconsideration which would have enabled you to draw deductions from it.When water is near and a weight is missing it is not a very far-fetchedsupposition that something has been sunk in the water. The idea was atleast worth testing; so with the help of Ames, who admitted me to theroom, and the crook of Dr. Watson's umbrella, I was able last night tofish up and inspect this bundle.
"It was of the first importance, however, that we should be able toprove who placed it there. This we accomplished by the very obviousdevice of announcing that the moat would be dried to-morrow, which had,of course, the effect that whoever had hidden the bundle would mostcertainly withdraw it the moment that darkness enabled him to do so. Wehave no less than four witnesses as to who it was who took advantage ofthe opportunity, and so, Mr. Barker, I think the word lies now withyou."
Sherlock Holmes put the sopping bundle upon the table beside the lampand undid the cord which bound it. From within he extracted adumb-bell, which he tossed down to its fellow in the corner. Next hedrew forth a pair of boots. "American, as you perceive," he remarked,pointing to the toes. Then he laid upon the table a long, deadly,sheathed knife. Finally he unravelled a bundle of clothing, comprisinga complete set of underclothes, socks, a gray tweed suit, and a shortyellow overcoat.
"The clothes are commonplace," remarked Holmes, "save only theovercoat, which is full of suggestive touches." He held it tenderlytowards the light. "Here, as you perceive, is the inner pocketprolonged into the lining in such fashion as to give ample space forthe truncated fowling piece. The tailor's tab is on the neck--'Neal,Outfitter, Vermissa, U. S. A.' I have spent an instructive afternoon inthe rector's library, and have enlarged my knowledge by adding the factthat Vermissa is a flourishing little town at the head of one of thebest known coal and iron valleys in the United States. I have somerecollection, Mr. Barker, that you associated the coal districts withMr. Douglas's first wife, and it would surely not be too far-fetched aninference that the V. V. upon the card by the dead body might stand forVermissa Valley, or that this very valley which sends forth emissariesof murder may be that Valley of Fear of which we have heard. So much isfairly clear. And now, Mr. Barker, I seem to be standing rather in theway of your explanation."
It was a sight to see Cecil Barker's expressive face during thisexposition of the great detective. Anger, amazement, conste
rnation, andindecision swept over it in turn. Finally he took refuge in a somewhatacrid irony.
"You know such a lot, Mr. Holmes, perhaps you had better tell us somemore," he sneered.
"I have no doubt that I could tell you a great deal more, Mr. Barker;but it would come with a better grace from you."
"Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if there's anysecret here it is not my secret, and I am not the man to give it away."
"Well, if you take that line, Mr. Barker," said the inspector quietly,"we must just keep you in sight until we have the warrant and can holdyou."
"You can do what you damn please about that," said Barker defiantly.
The proceedings seemed to have come to a definite end so far as he wasconcerned; for one had only to look at that granite face to realizethat no peine forte et dure would ever force him to plead against hiswill. The deadlock was broken, however, by a woman's voice. Mrs.Douglas had been standing listening at the half opened door, and nowshe entered the room.
"You have done enough for now, Cecil," said she. "Whatever comes of itin the future, you have done enough."
"Enough and more than enough," remarked Sherlock Holmes gravely. "Ihave every sympathy with you, madam, and should strongly urge you tohave some confidence in the common sense of our jurisdiction and totake the police voluntarily into your complete confidence. It may bethat I am myself at fault for not following up the hint which youconveyed to me through my friend, Dr. Watson; but, at that time I hadevery reason to believe that you were directly concerned in the crime.Now I am assured that this is not so. At the same time, there is muchthat is unexplained, and I should strongly recommend that you ask Mr.Douglas to tell us his own story."
Mrs. Douglas gave a cry of astonishment at Holmes's words. Thedetectives and I must have echoed it, when we were aware of a man whoseemed to have emerged from the wall, who advanced now from the gloomof the corner in which he had appeared. Mrs. Douglas turned, and in aninstant her arms were round him. Barker had seized his outstretchedhand.
"It's best this way, Jack," his wife repeated; "I am sure that it isbest."
"Indeed, yes, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes, "I am sure that youwill find it best."
The man stood blinking at us with the dazed look of one who comes fromthe dark into the light. It was a remarkable face, bold gray eyes, astrong, short-clipped, grizzled moustache, a square, projecting chin,and a humorous mouth. He took a good look at us all, and then to myamazement he advanced to me and handed me a bundle of paper.
"I've heard of you," said he in a voice which was not quite English andnot quite American, but was altogether mellow and pleasing. "You arethe historian of this bunch. Well, Dr. Watson, you've never had such astory as that pass through your hands before, and I'll lay my lastdollar on that. Tell it your own way; but there are the facts, and youcan't miss the public so long as you have those. I've been cooped uptwo days, and I've spent the daylight hours--as much daylight as Icould get in that rat trap--in putting the thing into words. You'rewelcome to them--you and your public. There's the story of the Valleyof Fear."
"That's the past, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes quietly. "What wedesire now is to hear your story of the present."
"You'll have it, sir," said Douglas. "May I smoke as I talk? Well,thank you, Mr. Holmes. You're a smoker yourself, if I remember right,and you'll guess what it is to be sitting for two days with tobacco inyour pocket and afraid that the smell will give you away." He leanedagainst the mantelpiece and sucked at the cigar which Holmes had handedhim. "I've heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I never guessed that I should meetyou. But before you are through with that," he nodded at my papers,"you will say I've brought you something fresh."
Inspector MacDonald had been staring at the newcomer with the greatestamazement. "Well, this fairly beats me!" he cried at last. "If you areMr. John Douglas of Birlstone Manor, then whose death have we beeninvestigating for these two days, and where in the world have yousprung from now? You seemed to me to come out of the floor like ajack-in-a-box."
"Ah, Mr. Mac," said Holmes, shaking a reproving forefinger, "you wouldnot read that excellent local compilation which described theconcealment of King Charles. People did not hide in those days withoutexcellent hiding places, and the hiding place that has once been usedmay be again. I had persuaded myself that we should find Mr. Douglasunder this roof."
"And how long have you been playing this trick upon us, Mr. Holmes?"said the inspector angrily. "How long have you allowed us to wasteourselves upon a search that you knew to be an absurd one?"
"Not one instant, my dear Mr. Mac. Only last night did I form my viewsof the case. As they could not be put to the proof until this evening,I invited you and your colleague to take a holiday for the day. Praywhat more could I do? When I found the suit of clothes in the moat, itat once became apparent to me that the body we had found could not havebeen the body of Mr. John Douglas at all, but must be that of thebicyclist from Tunbridge Wells. No other conclusion was possible.Therefore I had to determine where Mr. John Douglas himself could be,and the balance of probability was that with the connivance of his wifeand his friend he was concealed in a house which had such conveniencesfor a fugitive, and awaiting quieter times when he could make his finalescape."
"Well, you figured it out about right," said Douglas approvingly. "Ithought I'd dodge your British law; for I was not sure how I stoodunder it, and also I saw my chance to throw these hounds once for alloff my track. Mind you, from first to last I have done nothing to beashamed of, and nothing that I would not do again; but you'll judgethat for yourselves when I tell you my story. Never mind warning me,Inspector: I'm ready to stand pat upon the truth.
"I'm not going to begin at the beginning. That's all there," heindicated my bundle of papers, "and a mighty queer yarn you'll find it.It all comes down to this: That there are some men that have good causeto hate me and would give their last dollar to know that they had gotme. So long as I am alive and they are alive, there is no safety inthis world for me. They hunted me from Chicago to California, then theychased me out of America; but when I married and settled down in thisquiet spot I thought my last years were going to be peaceable.
"I never explained to my wife how things were. Why should I pull herinto it? She would never have a quiet moment again; but would always beimagining trouble. I fancy she knew something, for I may have dropped aword here or a word there; but until yesterday, after you gentlemen hadseen her, she never knew the rights of the matter. She told you all sheknew, and so did Barker here; for on the night when this thing happenedthere was mighty little time for explanations. She knows everythingnow, and I would have been a wiser man if I had told her sooner. But itwas a hard question, dear," he took her hand for an instant in his own,"and I acted for the best.
"Well, gentlemen, the day before these happenings I was over inTunbridge Wells, and I got a glimpse of a man in the street. It wasonly a glimpse; but I have a quick eye for these things, and I neverdoubted who it was. It was the worst enemy I had among them all--onewho has been after me like a hungry wolf after a caribou all theseyears. I knew there was trouble coming, and I came home and made readyfor it. I guessed I'd fight through it all right on my own, my luck wasa proverb in the States about '76. I never doubted that it would bewith me still.
"I was on my guard all that next day, and never went out into the park.It's as well, or he'd have had the drop on me with that buckshot gun ofhis before ever I could draw on him. After the bridge was up--my mindwas always more restful when that bridge was up in the evenings--I putthe thing clear out of my head. I never dreamed of his getting into thehouse and waiting for me. But when I made my round in my dressing gown,as was my habit, I had no sooner entered the study than I scenteddanger. I guess when a man has had dangers in his life--and I've hadmore than most in my time--there is a kind of sixth sense that wavesthe red flag. I saw the signal clear enough, and yet I couldn't tellyou why. Next instant I spotted a boot under the window curtain, andthen I sa
w why plain enough.
"I'd just the one candle that was in my hand; but there was a goodlight from the hall lamp through the open door. I put down the candleand jumped for a hammer that I'd left on the mantel. At the same momenthe sprang at me. I saw the glint of a knife, and I lashed at him withthe hammer. I got him somewhere; for the knife tinkled down on thefloor. He dodged round the table as quick as an eel, and a moment laterhe'd got his gun from under his coat. I heard him cock it; but I hadgot hold of it before he could fire. I had it by the barrel, and wewrestled for it all ends up for a minute or more. It was death to theman that lost his grip.
"He never lost his grip; but he got it butt downward for a moment toolong. Maybe it was I that pulled the trigger. Maybe we just jolted itoff between us. Anyhow, he got both barrels in the face, and there Iwas, staring down at all that was left of Ted Baldwin. I'd recognizedhim in the township, and again when he sprang for me; but his ownmother wouldn't recognize him as I saw him then. I'm used to roughwork; but I fairly turned sick at the sight of him.
"I was hanging on the side of the table when Barker came hurrying down.I heard my wife coming, and I ran to the door and stopped her. It wasno sight for a woman. I promised I'd come to her soon. I said a word ortwo to Barker--he took it all in at a glance--and we waited for therest to come along. But there was no sign of them. Then we understoodthat they could hear nothing, and that all that had happened was knownonly to ourselves.
"It was at that instant that the idea came to me. I was fairly dazzledby the brilliance of it. The man's sleeve had slipped up and there wasthe branded mark of the lodge upon his forearm. See here!"
The man whom we had known as Douglas turned up his own coat and cuff toshow a brown triangle within a circle exactly like that which we hadseen upon the dead man.
"It was the sight of that which started me on it. I seemed to see itall clear at a glance. There were his height and hair and figure, aboutthe same as my own. No one could swear to his face, poor devil! Ibrought down this suit of clothes, and in a quarter of an hour Barkerand I had put my dressing gown on him and he lay as you found him. Wetied all his things into a bundle, and I weighted them with the onlyweight I could find and put them through the window. The card he hadmeant to lay upon my body was lying beside his own.
"My rings were put on his finger; but when it came to the weddingring," he held out his muscular hand, "you can see for yourselves thatI had struck the limit. I have not moved it since the day I wasmarried, and it would have taken a file to get it off. I don't know,anyhow, that I should have cared to part with it; but if I had wantedto I couldn't. So we just had to leave that detail to take care ofitself. On the other hand, I brought a bit of plaster down and put itwhere I am wearing one myself at this instant. You slipped up there,Mr. Holmes, clever as you are; for if you had chanced to take off thatplaster you would have found no cut underneath it.
"Well, that was the situation. If I could lie low for a while and thenget away where I could be joined by my 'widow' we should have a chanceat last of living in peace for the rest of our lives. These devilswould give me no rest so long as I was above ground; but if they saw inthe papers that Baldwin had got his man, there would be an end of allmy troubles. I hadn't much time to make it all clear to Barker and tomy wife; but they understood enough to be able to help me. I knew allabout this hiding place, so did Ames; but it never entered his head toconnect it with the matter. I retired into it, and it was up to Barkerto do the rest.
"I guess you can fill in for yourselves what he did. He opened thewindow and made the mark on the sill to give an idea of how themurderer escaped. It was a tall order, that; but as the bridge was upthere was no other way. Then, when everything was fixed, he rang thebell for all he was worth. What happened afterward you know. And so,gentlemen, you can do what you please; but I've told you the truth andthe whole truth, so help me God! What I ask you now is how do I standby the English law?"
There was a silence which was broken by Sherlock Holmes.
"The English law is in the main a just law. You will get no worse thanyour deserts from that, Mr. Douglas. But I would ask you how did thisman know that you lived here, or how to get into your house, or whereto hide to get you?"
"I know nothing of this."
Holmes's face was very white and grave. "The story is not over yet, Ifear," said he. "You may find worse dangers than the English law, oreven than your enemies from America. I see trouble before you, Mr.Douglas. You'll take my advice and still be on your guard."
And now, my long-suffering readers, I will ask you to come away with mefor a time, far from the Sussex Manor House of Birlstone, and far alsofrom the year of grace in which we made our eventful journey whichended with the strange story of the man who had been known as JohnDouglas. I wish you to journey back some twenty years in time, andwestward some thousands of miles in space, that I may lay before you asingular and terrible narrative--so singular and so terrible that youmay find it hard to believe that even as I tell it, even so did itoccur.
Do not think that I intrude one story before another is finished. Asyou read on you will find that this is not so. And when I have detailedthose distant events and you have solved this mystery of the past, weshall meet once more in those rooms on Baker Street, where this, likeso many other wonderful happenings, will find its end.
PART 2
The Scowrers
Chapter 1
The Man
It was the fourth of February in the year 1875. It had been a severewinter, and the snow lay deep in the gorges of the Gilmerton Mountains.The steam ploughs had, however, kept the railroad open, and the eveningtrain which connects the long line of coal-mining and iron-workingsettlements was slowly groaning its way up the steep gradients whichlead from Stagville on the plain to Vermissa, the central townshipwhich lies at the head of Vermissa Valley. From this point the tracksweeps downward to Bartons Crossing, Helmdale, and the purelyagricultural county of Merton. It was a single-track railroad; but atevery siding--and they were numerous--long lines of trucks piled withcoal and iron ore told of the hidden wealth which had brought a rudepopulation and a bustling life to this most desolate corner of theUnited States of America.
For desolate it was! Little could the first pioneer who had traversedit have ever imagined that the fairest prairies and the most lush waterpastures were valueless compared to this gloomy land of black crag andtangled forest. Above the dark and often scarcely penetrable woods upontheir flanks, the high, bare crowns of the mountains, white snow, andjagged rock towered upon each flank, leaving a long, winding, tortuousvalley in the centre. Up this the little train was slowly crawling.
The oil lamps had just been lit in the leading passenger car, a long,bare carriage in which some twenty or thirty people were seated. Thegreater number of these were workmen returning from their day's toil inthe lower part of the valley. At least a dozen, by their grimed facesand the safety lanterns which they carried, proclaimed themselvesminers. These sat smoking in a group and conversed in low voices,glancing occasionally at two men on the opposite side of the car, whoseuniforms and badges showed them to be policemen.
Several women of the labouring class and one or two travellers whomight have been small local storekeepers made up the rest of thecompany, with the exception of one young man in a corner by himself. Itis with this man that we are concerned. Take a good look at him, for heis worth it.
He is a fresh-complexioned, middle-sized young man, not far, one wouldguess, from his thirtieth year. He has large, shrewd, humorous grayeyes which twinkle inquiringly from time to time as he looks roundthrough his spectacles at the people about him. It is easy to see thathe is of a sociable and possibly simple disposition, anxious to befriendly to all men. Anyone could pick him at once as gregarious in hishabits and communicative in his nature, with a quick wit and a readysmile. And yet the man who studied him more closely might discern acertain firmness of jaw and grim tightness about the lips which wouldwarn him that there were depths beyond, and that this pleasant,brown-haired young Irishman might conceivably leave his mark for goodor evil upon any society to which he was introduced.
Having made one or two tentative remarks to the nearest miner, andreceiving only short, gruff replies, the traveller resigned himself touncongenial silence, staring moodily out of the window at the fadinglandscape.
It was not a cheering prospect. Through the growing gloom there pulsedthe red glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills. Great heaps ofslag and dumps of cinders loomed up on each side, with the high shaftsof the collieries towering above them. Huddled groups of mean, woodenhouses, the windows of which were beginning to outline themselves inlight, were scattered here and there along the line, and the frequenthalting places were crowded with their swarthy inhabitants.
The iron and coal valleys of the Vermissa district were no resorts forthe leisured or the cultured. Everywhere there were stern signs of thecrudest battle of life, the rude work to be done, and the rude, strongworkers who did it.
The young traveller gazed out into this dismal country with a face ofmingled repulsion and interest, which showed that the scene was new tohim. At intervals he drew from his pocket a bulky letter to which hereferred, and on the margins of which he scribbled some notes. Oncefrom the back of his waist he produced something which one would hardlyhave expected to find in the possession of so mild-mannered a man. Itwas a navy revolver of the largest size. As he turned it slantwise tothe light, the glint upon the rims of the copper shells within the drumshowed that it was fully loaded. He quickly restored it to his secretpocket, but not before it had been observed by a working man who hadseated himself upon the adjoining bench.
"Hullo, mate!" said he. "You seem heeled and ready."
The young man smiled with an air of embarrassment.
"Yes," said he, "we need them sometimes in the place I come from."
"And where may that be?"
"I'm last from Chicago."
"A stranger in these parts?"
"Yes."
"You may find you need it here," said the workman.
"Ah! is that so?" The young man seemed interested.
"Have you heard nothing of doings hereabouts?"
"Nothing out of the way."
"Why, I thought the country was full of it. You'll hear quick enough.What made you come here?"
"I heard there was always work for a willing man."
"Are you a member of the union?"
"Sure."
"Then you'll get your job, I guess. Have you any friends?"
"Not yet; but I have the means of making them."
"How's that, then?"
"I am one of the Eminent Order of Freemen. There's no town without alodge, and where there is a lodge I'll find my friends."
The remark had a singular effect upon his companion. He glanced roundsuspiciously at the others in the car. The miners were still whisperingamong themselves. The two police officers were dozing. He came across,seated himself close to the young traveller, and held out his hand.
"Put it there," he said.
A hand-grip passed between the two.
"I see you speak the truth," said the workman. "But it's well to makecertain." He raised his right hand to his right eyebrow. The travellerat once raised his left hand to his left eyebrow.
"Dark nights are unpleasant," said the workman.
"Yes, for strangers to travel," the other answered.
"That's good enough. I'm Brother Scanlan, Lodge 341, Vermissa Valley.Glad to see you in these parts."
"Thank you. I'm Brother John McMurdo, Lodge 29, Chicago. Bodymaster J.H. Scott. But I am in luck to meet a brother so early."
"Well, there are plenty of us about. You won't find the order moreflourishing anywhere in the States than right here in Vermissa Valley.But we could do with some lads like you. I can't understand a spry manof the union finding no work to do in Chicago."
"I found plenty of work to do," said McMurdo.
"Then why did you leave?"
McMurdo nodded towards the policemen and smiled. "I guess those chapswould be glad to know," he said.
Scanlan groaned sympathetically. "In trouble?" he asked in a whisper.
"Deep."
"A penitentiary job?"
"And the rest."
"Not a killing!"
"It's early days to talk of such things," said McMurdo with the air ofa man who had been surprised into saying more than he intended. "I'vemy own good reasons for leaving Chicago, and let that be enough foryou. Who are you that you should take it on yourself to ask suchthings?" His gray eyes gleamed with sudden and dangerous anger frombehind his glasses.
"All right, mate, no offense meant. The boys will think none the worseof you, whatever you may have done. Where are you bound for now?"
"Vermissa."
"That's the third halt down the line. Where are you staying?"
McMurdo took out an envelope and held it close to the murky oil lamp."Here is the address--Jacob Shafter, Sheridan Street. It's a boardinghouse that was recommended by a man I knew in Chicago."
"Well, I don't know it; but Vermissa is out of my beat. I live atHobson's Patch, and that's here where we are drawing up. But, say,there's one bit of advice I'll give you before we part: If you're introuble in Vermissa, go straight to the Union House and see BossMcGinty. He is the Bodymaster of Vermissa Lodge, and nothing can happenin
these parts unless Black Jack McGinty wants it. So long, mate! Maybewe'll meet in lodge one of these evenings. But mind my words: If youare in trouble, go to Boss McGinty."
Scanlan descended, and McMurdo was left once again to his thoughts.Night had now fallen, and the flames of the frequent furnaces wereroaring and leaping in the darkness. Against their lurid backgrounddark figures were bending and straining, twisting and turning, with themotion of winch or of windlass, to the rhythm of an eternal clank androar.
"I guess hell must look something like that," said a voice.
McMurdo turned and saw that one of the policemen had shifted in hisseat and was staring out into the fiery waste.
"For that matter," said the other policeman, "I allow that hell must besomething like that. If there are worse devils down yonder than some wecould name, it's more than I'd expect. I guess you are new to thispart, young man?"
"Well, what if I am?" McMurdo answered in a surly voice.
"Just this, mister, that I should advise you to be careful in choosingyour friends. I don't think I'd begin with Mike Scanlan or his gang ifI were you."
"What the hell is it to you who are my friends?" roared McMurdo in avoice which brought every head in the carriage round to witness thealtercation. "Did I ask you for your advice, or did you think me such asucker that I couldn't move without it? You speak when you are spokento, and by the Lord you'd have to wait a long time if it was me!" Hethrust out his face and grinned at the patrolmen like a snarling dog.
The two policemen, heavy, good-natured men, were taken aback by theextraordinary vehemence with which their friendly advances had beenrejected.
"No offense, stranger," said one. "It was a warning for your own good,seeing that you are, by your own showing, new to the place."
"I'm new to the place; but I'm not new to you and your kind!" criedMcMurdo in cold fury. "I guess you're the same in all places, shovingyour advice in when nobody asks for it."
"Maybe we'll see more of you before very long," said one of thepatrolmen with a grin. "You're a real hand-picked one, if I am a judge."
"I was thinking the same," remarked the other. "I guess we may meetagain."
"I'm not afraid of you, and don't you think it!" cried McMurdo. "Myname's Jack McMurdo--see? If you want me, you'll find me at JacobShafter's on Sheridan Street, Vermissa; so I'm not hiding from you, amI? Day or night I dare to look the like of you in the face--don't makeany mistake about that!"
There was a murmur of sympathy and admiration from the miners at thedauntless demeanour of the newcomer, while the two policemen shruggedtheir shoulders and renewed a conversation between themselves.
A few minutes later the train ran into the ill-lit station, and therewas a general clearing; for Vermissa was by far the largest town on theline. McMurdo picked up his leather gripsack and was about to start offinto the darkness, when one of the miners accosted him.
"By Gar, mate! you know how to speak to the cops," he said in a voiceof awe. "It was grand to hear you. Let me carry your grip and show youthe road. I'm passing Shafter's on the way to my own shack."
There was a chorus of friendly "Good-nights" from the other miners asthey passed from the platform. Before ever he had set foot in it,McMurdo the turbulent had become a character in Vermissa.
The country had been a place of terror; but the town was in its wayeven more depressing. Down that long valley there was at least acertain gloomy grandeur in the huge fires and the clouds of driftingsmoke, while the strength and industry of man found fitting monumentsin the hills which he had spilled by the side of his monstrousexcavations. But the town showed a dead level of mean ugliness andsqualor. The broad street was churned up by the traffic into a horriblerutted paste of muddy snow. The sidewalks were narrow and uneven. Thenumerous gas-lamps served only to show more clearly a long line ofwooden houses, each with its veranda facing the street, unkempt anddirty.
As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened by arow of well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster of saloons andgaming houses, in which the miners spent their hard-earned but generouswages.
"That's the Union House," said the guide, pointing to one saloon whichrose almost to the dignity of being a hotel. "Jack McGinty is the bossthere."
"What sort of a man is he?" McMurdo asked.
"What! have you never heard of the boss?"
"How could I have heard of him when you know that I am a stranger inthese parts?"
"Well, I thought his name was known clear across the country. It's beenin the papers often enough."
"What for?"
"Well," the miner lowered his voice--"over the affairs."
"What affairs?"
"Good Lord, mister! you are queer, if I must say it without offense.There's only one set of affairs that you'll hear of in these parts, andthat's the affairs of the Scowrers."
"Why, I seem to have read of the Scowrers in Chicago. A gang ofmurderers, are they not?"
"Hush, on your life!" cried the miner, standing still in alarm, andgazing in amazement at his companion. "Man, you won't live long inthese parts if you speak in the open street like that. Many a man hashad the life beaten out of him for less."
"Well, I know nothing about them. It's only what I have read."
"And I'm not saying that you have not read the truth." The man lookednervously round him as he spoke, peering into the shadows as if hefeared to see some lurking danger. "If killing is murder, then Godknows there is murder and to spare. But don't you dare to breathe thename of Jack McGinty in connection with it, stranger; for every whispergoes back to him, and he is not one that is likely to let it pass. Now,that's the house you're after, that one standing back from the street.You'll find old Jacob Shafter that runs it as honest a man as lives inthis township."
"I thank you," said McMurdo, and shaking hands with his newacquaintance he plodded, gripsack in hand, up the path which led to thedwelling house, at the door of which he gave a resounding knock.
It was opened at once by someone very different from what he hadexpected. It was a woman, young and singularly beautiful. She was ofthe German type, blonde and fair-haired, with the piquant contrast of apair of beautiful dark eyes with which she surveyed the stranger withsurprise and a pleasing embarrassment which brought a wave of colourover her pale face. Framed in the bright light of the open doorway, itseemed to McMurdo that he had never seen a more beautiful picture; themore attractive for its contrast with the sordid and gloomysurroundings. A lovely violet growing upon one of those blackslag-heaps of the mines would not have seemed more surprising. Soentranced was he that he stood staring without a word, and it was shewho broke the silence.
"I thought it was father," said she with a pleasing little touch of aGerman accent. "Did you come to see him? He is downtown. I expect himback every minute."
McMurdo continued to gaze at her in open admiration until her eyesdropped in confusion before this masterful visitor.
"No, miss," he said at last, "I'm in no hurry to see him. But yourhouse was recommended to me for board. I thought it might suit me--andnow I know it will."
"You are quick to make up your mind," said she with a smile.
"Anyone but a blind man could do as much," the other answered.
She laughed at the compliment. "Come right in, sir," she said. "I'mMiss Ettie Shafter, Mr. Shafter's daughter. My mother's dead, and I runthe house. You can sit down by the stove in the front room until fathercomes along--Ah, here he is! So you can fix things with him right away."
A heavy, elderly man came plodding up the path. In a few words McMurdoexplained his business. A man of the name of Murphy had given him theaddress in Chicago. He in turn had had it from someone else. OldShafter was quite ready. The stranger made no bones about terms, agreedat once to every condition, and was apparently fairly flush of money.For seven dollars a week paid in advance he was to have board andlodging.
So it was that McMurdo, the self-confessed fugitive from justice, tookup his abode under the roof of t
he Shafters, the first step which wasto lead to so long and dark a train of events, ending in a far distantland.
Chapter 2
The Bodymaster
McMurdo was a man who made his mark quickly. Wherever he was the folkaround soon knew it. Within a week he had become infinitely the mostimportant person at Shafter's. There were ten or a dozen boardersthere; but they were honest foremen or commonplace clerks from thestores, of a very different calibre from the young Irishman. Of anevening when they gathered together his joke was always the readiest,his conversation the brightest, and his song the best. He was a bornboon companion, with a magnetism which drew good humour from all aroundhim.
And yet he showed again and again, as he had shown in the railwaycarriage, a capacity for sudden, fierce anger, which compelled therespect and even the fear of those who met him. For the law, too, andall who were connected with it, he exhibited a bitter contempt whichdelighted some and alarmed others of his fellow boarders.
From the first he made it evident, by his open admiration, that thedaughter of the house had won his heart from the instant that he hadset eyes upon her beauty and her grace. He was no backward suitor. Onthe second day he told her that he loved her, and from then onward herepeated the same story with an absolute disregard of what she mightsay to discourage him.
"Someone else?" he would cry. "Well, the worse luck for someone else!Let him look out for himself! Am I to lose my life's chance and all myheart's desire for someone else? You can keep on saying no, Ettie: theday will come when you will say yes, and I'm young enough to wait."
He was a dangerous suitor, with his glib Irish tongue, and his pretty,coaxing ways. There was about him also that glamour of experience andof mystery which attracts a woman's interest, and finally her love. Hecould talk of the sweet valleys of County Monaghan from which he came,of the lovely, distant island, the low hills and green meadows of whichseemed the more beautiful when imagination viewed them from this placeof grime and snow.
Then he was versed in the life of the cities of the North, of Detroit,and the lumber camps of Michigan, and finally of Chicago, where he hadworked in a planing mill. And afterwards came the hint of romance, thefeeling that strange things had happened to him in that great city, sostrange and so intimate that they might not be spoken of. He spokewistfully of a sudden leaving, a breaking of old ties, a flight into astrange world, ending in this dreary valley, and Ettie listened, herdark eyes gleaming with pity and with sympathy--those two qualitieswhich may turn so rapidly and so naturally to love.
McMurdo had obtained a temporary job as bookkeeper; for he was awell-educated man. This kept him out most of the day, and he had notfound occasion yet to report himself to the head of the lodge of theEminent Order of Freemen. He was reminded of his omission, however, bya visit one evening from Mike Scanlan, the fellow member whom he hadmet in the train. Scanlan, the small, sharp-faced, nervous, black-eyedman, seemed glad to see him once more. After a glass or two of whiskyhe broached the object of his visit.
"Say, McMurdo," said he, "I remembered your address, so I made bold tocall. I'm surprised that you've not reported to the Bodymaster. Whyhaven't you seen Boss McGinty yet?"
"Well, I had to find a job. I have been busy."
"You must find time for him if you have none for anything else. GoodLord, man! you're a fool not to have been down to the Union House andregistered your name the first morning after you came here! If you runagainst him--well, you mustn't, that's all!"
McMurdo showed mild surprise. "I've been a member of the lodge for overtwo years, Scanlan, but I never heard that duties were so pressing asall that."
"Maybe not in Chicago."
"Well, it's the same society here."
"Is it?"
Scanlan looked at him long and fixedly. There was something sinister inhis eyes.
"Isn't it?"
"You'll tell me that in a month's time. I hear you had a talk with thepatrolmen after I left the train."
"How did you know that?"
"Oh, it got about--things do get about for good and for bad in thisdistrict."
"Well, yes. I told the hounds what I thought of them."
"By the Lord, you'll be a man after McGinty's heart!"
"What, does he hate the police too?"
Scanlan burst out laughing. "You go and see him, my lad," said he as hetook his leave. "It's not the police but you that he'll hate if youdon't! Now, take a friend's advice and go at once!"
It chanced that on the same evening McMurdo had another more pressinginterview which urged him in the same direction. It may have been thathis attentions to Ettie had been more evident than before, or that theyhad gradually obtruded themselves into the slow mind of his good Germanhost; but, whatever the cause, the boarding-house keeper beckoned theyoung man into his private room and started on the subject without anycircumlocution.
"It seems to me, mister," said he, "that you are gettin' set on myEttie. Ain't that so, or am I wrong?"
"Yes, that is so," the young man answered.
"Vell, I vant to tell you right now that it ain't no manner of use.There's someone slipped in afore you."
"She told me so."
"Vell, you can lay that she told you truth. But did she tell you who itvas?"
"No, I asked her; but she wouldn't tell."
"I dare say not, the leetle baggage! Perhaps she did not vish tofrighten you avay."
"Frighten!" McMurdo was on fire in a moment.
"Ah, yes, my friend! You need not be ashamed to be frightened of him.It is Teddy Baldwin."
"And who the devil is he?"
"He is a boss of Scowrers."
"Scowrers! I've heard of them before. It's Scowrers here and Scowrersthere, and always in a whisper! What are you all afraid of? Who are theScowrers?"
The boarding-house keeper instinctively sank his voice, as everyone didwho talked about that terrible society. "The Scowrers," said he, "arethe Eminent Order of Freemen!"
The young man stared. "Why, I am a member of that order myself."
"You! I vould never have had you in my house if I had known it--not ifyou vere to pay me a hundred dollar a week."
"What's wrong with the order? It's for charity and good fellowship. Therules say so."
"Maybe in some places. Not here!"
"What is it here?"
"It's a murder society, that's vat it is."
McMurdo laughed incredulously. "How can you prove that?" he asked.
"Prove it! Are there not fifty murders to prove it? Vat about Milmanand Van Shorst, and the Nicholson family, and old Mr. Hyam, and littleBilly James, and the others? Prove it! Is there a man or a voman inthis valley vat does not know it?"
"See here!" said McMurdo earnestly. "I want you to take back whatyou've said, or else make it good. One or the other you must do beforeI quit this room. Put yourself in my place. Here am I, a stranger inthe town. I belong to a society that I know only as an innocent one.You'll find it through the length and breadth of the States, but alwaysas an innocent one. Now, when I am counting upon joining it here, youtell me that it is the same as a murder society called the Scowrers. Iguess you owe me either an apology or else an explanation, Mr. Shafter."
"I can but tell you vat the whole vorld knows, mister. The bosses ofthe one are the bosses of the other. If you offend the one, it is theother vat vill strike you. We have proved it too often."
"That's just gossip--I want proof!" said McMurdo.
"If you live here long you vill get your proof. But I forget that youare yourself one of them. You vill soon be as bad as the rest. But youvill find other lodgings, mister. I cannot have you here. Is it not badenough that one of these people come courting my Ettie, and that I darenot turn him down, but that I should have another for my boarder? Yes,indeed, you shall not sleep here after to-night!"
McMurdo found himself under sentence of banishment both from hiscomfortable quarters and from the girl whom he loved. He found heralone in the sitting-room that same evening, and he poured his troublesinto her ear.
"Sure, your father is after giving me notice," he said. "It's
little Iwould care if it was just my room, but indeed, Ettie, though it's onlya week that I've known you, you are the very breath of life to me, andI can't live without you!"
"Oh, hush, Mr. McMurdo, don't speak so!" said the girl. "I have toldyou, have I not, that you are too late? There is another, and if I havenot promised to marry him at once, at least I can promise no one else."
"Suppose I had been first, Ettie, would I have had a chance?"
The girl sank her face into her hands. "I wish to heaven that you hadbeen first!" she sobbed.
McMurdo was down on his knees before her in an instant. "For God'ssake, Ettie, let it stand at that!" he cried. "Will you ruin your lifeand my own for the sake of this promise? Follow your heart, acushla!'Tis a safer guide than any promise before you knew what it was thatyou were saying."
He had seized Ettie's white hand between his own strong brown ones.
"Say that you will be mine, and we will face it out together!"
"Not here?"
"Yes, here."
"No, no, Jack!" His arms were round her now. "It could not be here.Could you take me away?"
A struggle passed for a moment over McMurdo's face; but it ended bysetting like granite. "No, here," he said. "I'll hold you against theworld, Ettie, right here where we are!"
"Why should we not leave together?"
"No, Ettie, I can't leave here."
"But why?"
"I'd never hold my head up again if I felt that I had been driven out.Besides, what is there to be afraid of? Are we not free folks in a freecountry? If you love me, and I you, who will dare to come between?"
"You don't know, Jack. You've been here too short a time. You don'tknow this Baldwin. You don't know McGinty and his Scowrers."
"No, I don't know them, and I don't fear them, and I don't believe inthem!" said McMurdo. "I've lived among rough men, my darling, andinstead of fearing them it has always ended that they have fearedme--always, Ettie. It's mad on the face of it! If these men, as yourfather says, have done crime after crime in the valley, and if everyoneknows them by name, how comes it that none are brought to justice? Youanswer me that, Ettie!"
"Because no witness dares to appear against them. He would not live amonth if he did. Also because they have always their own men to swearthat the accused one was far from the scene of the crime. But surely,Jack, you must have read all this. I had understood that every paper inthe United States was writing about it."
"Well, I have read something, it is true; but I had thought it was astory. Maybe these men have some reason in what they do. Maybe they arewronged and have no other way to help themselves."
"Oh, Jack, don't let me hear you speak so! That is how he speaks--theother one!"
"Baldwin--he speaks like that, does he?"
"And that is why I loathe him so. Oh, Jack, now I can tell you thetruth. I loathe him with all my heart; but I fear him also. I fear himfor myself; but above all I fear him for father. I know that some greatsorrow would come upon us if I dared to say what I really felt. That iswhy I have put him off with half-promises. It was in real truth ouronly hope. But if you would fly with me, Jack, we could take fatherwith us and live forever far from the power of these wicked men."
Again there was the struggle upon McMurdo's face, and again it set likegranite. "No harm shall come to you, Ettie--nor to your father either.As to wicked men, I expect you may find that I am as bad as the worstof them before we're through."
"No, no, Jack! I would trust you anywhere."
McMurdo laughed bitterly. "Good Lord! how little you know of me! Yourinnocent soul, my darling, could not even guess what is passing inmine. But, hullo, who's the visitor?"
The door had opened suddenly, and a young fellow came swaggering inwith the air of one who is the master. He was a handsome, dashing youngman of about the same age and build as McMurdo himself. Under hisbroad-brimmed black felt hat, which he had not troubled to remove, ahandsome face with fierce, domineering eyes and a curved hawk-bill of anose looked savagely at the pair who sat by the stove.
Ettie had jumped to her feet full of confusion and alarm. "I'm glad tosee you, Mr. Baldwin," said she. "You're earlier than I had thought.Come and sit down."
Baldwin stood with his hands on his hips looking at McMurdo. "Who isthis?" he asked curtly.
"It's a friend of mine, Mr. Baldwin, a new boarder here. Mr. McMurdo,may I introduce you to Mr. Baldwin?"
The young men nodded in surly fashion to each other.
"Maybe Miss Ettie has told you how it is with us?" said Baldwin.
"I didn't understand that there was any relation between you."
"Didn't you? Well, you can understand it now. You can take it from methat this young lady is mine, and you'll find it a very fine eveningfor a walk."
"Thank you, I am in no humour for a walk."
"Aren't you?" The man's savage eyes were blazing with anger. "Maybe youare in a humour for a fight, Mr. Boarder!"
"That I am!" cried McMurdo, springing to his feet. "You never said amore welcome word."
"For God's sake, Jack! Oh, for God's sake!" cried poor, distractedEttie. "Oh, Jack, Jack, he will hurt you!"
"Oh, it's Jack, is it?" said Baldwin with an oath. "You've come to thatalready, have you?"
"Oh, Ted, be reasonable--be kind! For my sake, Ted, if ever you lovedme, be big-hearted and forgiving!"
"I think, Ettie, that if you were to leave us alone we could get thisthing settled," said McMurdo quietly. "Or maybe, Mr. Baldwin, you willtake a turn down the street with me. It's a fine evening, and there'ssome open ground beyond the next block."
"I'll get even with you without needing to dirty my hands," said hisenemy. "You'll wish you had never set foot in this house before I amthrough with you!"
"No time like the present," cried McMurdo.
"I'll choose my own time, mister. You can leave the time to me. Seehere!" He suddenly rolled up his sleeve and showed upon his forearm apeculiar sign which appeared to have been branded there. It was acircle with a triangle within it. "D'you know what that means?"
"I neither know nor care!"
"Well, you will know, I'll promise you that. You won't be much older,either. Perhaps Miss Ettie can tell you something about it. As to you,Ettie, you'll come back to me on your knees--d'ye hear, girl?--on yourknees--and then I'll tell you what your punishment may be. You'vesowed--and by the Lord, I'll see that you reap!" He glanced at themboth in fury. Then he turned upon his heel, and an instant later theouter door had banged behind him.
For a few moments McMurdo and the girl stood in silence. Then she threwher arms around him.
"Oh, Jack, how brave you were! But it is no use, you must fly!To-night--Jack--to-night! It's your only hope. He will have your life.I read it in his horrible eyes. What chance have you against a dozen ofthem, with Boss McGinty and all the power of the lodge behind them?"
McMurdo disengaged her hands, kissed her, and gently pushed her backinto a chair. "There, acushla, there! Don't be disturbed or fear forme. I'm a Freeman myself. I'm after telling your father about it. MaybeI am no better than the others; so don't make a saint of me. Perhapsyou hate me too, now that I've told you as much?"
"Hate you, Jack? While life lasts I could never do that! I've heardthat there is no harm in being a Freeman anywhere but here; so whyshould I think the worse of you for that? But if you are a Freeman,Jack, why should you not go down and make a friend of Boss McGinty? Oh,hurry, Jack, hurry! Get your word in first, or the hounds will be onyour trail."
"I was thinking the same thing," said McMurdo. "I'll go right now andfix it. You can tell your father that I'll sleep here to-night and findsome other quarters in the morning."
The bar of McGinty's saloon was crowded as usual, for it was thefavourite loafing place of all the rougher elements of the town. Theman was popular; for he had a rough, jovial disposition which formed amask, covering a great deal which lay behind it. But apart from thispopularity, the fear in which he was held throughout the township, andindee
d down the whole thirty miles of the valley and past the mountainson each side of it, was enough in itself to fill his bar; for nonecould afford to neglect his good will.
Besides those secret powers which it was universally believed that heexercised in so pitiless a fashion, he was a high public official, amunicipal councillor, and a commissioner of roads, elected to theoffice through the votes of the ruffians who in turn expected toreceive favours at his hands. Assessments and taxes were enormous; thepublic works were notoriously neglected, the accounts were slurred overby bribed auditors, and the decent citizen was terrorized into payingpublic blackmail, and holding his tongue lest some worse thing befallhim.
Thus it was that, year by year, Boss McGinty's diamond pins became moreobtrusive, his gold chains more weighty across a more gorgeous vest,and his saloon stretched farther and farther, until it threatened toabsorb one whole side of the Market Square.
McMurdo pushed open the swinging door of the saloon and made his wayamid the crowd of men within, through an atmosphere blurred withtobacco smoke and heavy with the smell of spirits. The place wasbrilliantly lighted, and the huge, heavily gilt mirrors upon every wallreflected and multiplied the garish illumination. There were severalbartenders in their shirt sleeves, hard at work mixing drinks for theloungers who fringed the broad, brass-trimmed counter.
At the far end, with his body resting upon the bar and a cigar stuck atan acute angle from the corner of his mouth, stood a tall, strong,heavily built man who could be none other than the famous McGintyhimself. He was a black-maned giant, bearded to the cheek-bones, andwith a shock of raven hair which fell to his collar. His complexion wasas swarthy as that of an Italian, and his eyes were of a strange deadblack, which, combined with a slight squint, gave them a particularlysinister appearance.
All else in the man--his noble proportions, his fine features, and hisfrank bearing--fitted in with that jovial, man-to-man manner which heaffected. Here, one would say, is a bluff, honest fellow, whose heartwould be sound however rude his outspoken words might seem. It was onlywhen those dead, dark eyes, deep and remorseless, were turned upon aman that he shrank within himself, feeling that he was face to facewith an infinite possibility of latent evil, with a strength andcourage and cunning behind it which made it a thousand times moredeadly.
Having had a good look at his man, McMurdo elbowed his way forward withhis usual careless audacity, and pushed himself through the littlegroup of courtiers who were fawning upon the powerful boss, laughinguproariously at the smallest of his jokes. The young stranger's boldgray eyes looked back fearlessly through their glasses at the deadlyblack ones which turned sharply upon him.
"Well, young man, I can't call your face to mind."
"I'm new here, Mr. McGinty."
"You are not so new that you can't give a gentleman his proper title."
"He's Councillor McGinty, young man," said a voice from the group.
"I'm sorry, Councillor. I'm strange to the ways of the place. But I wasadvised to see you."
"Well, you see me. This is all there is. What d'you think of me?"
"Well, it's early days. If your heart is as big as your body, and yoursoul as fine as your face, then I'd ask for nothing better," saidMcMurdo.
"By Gar! you've got an Irish tongue in your head anyhow," cried thesaloon-keeper, not quite certain whether to humour this audaciousvisitor or to stand upon his dignity.
"So you are good enough to pass my appearance?"
"Sure," said McMurdo.
"And you were told to see me?"
"I was."
"And who told you?"
"Brother Scanlan of Lodge 341, Vermissa. I drink your healthCouncillor, and to our better acquaintance." He raised a glass withwhich he had been served to his lips and elevated his little finger ashe drank it.
McGinty, who had been watching him narrowly, raised his thick blackeyebrows. "Oh, it's like that, is it?" said he. "I'll have to look abit closer into this, Mister--"
"McMurdo."
"A bit closer, Mr. McMurdo; for we don't take folk on trust in theseparts, nor believe all we're told neither. Come in here for a moment,behind the bar."
There was a small room there, lined with barrels. McGinty carefullyclosed the door, and then seated himself on one of them, bitingthoughtfully on his cigar and surveying his companion with thosedisquieting eyes. For a couple of minutes he sat in complete silence.McMurdo bore the inspection cheerfully, one hand in his coat pocket,the other twisting his brown moustache. Suddenly McGinty stooped andproduced a wicked-looking revolver.
"See here, my joker," said he, "if I thought you were playing any gameon us, it would be short work for you."
"This is a strange welcome," McMurdo answered with some dignity, "forthe Bodymaster of a lodge of Freemen to give to a stranger brother."
"Ay, but it's just that same that you have to prove," said McGinty,"and God help you if you fail! Where were you made?"
"Lodge 29, Chicago."
"When?"
"June 24, 1872."
"What Bodymaster?"
"James H. Scott."
"Who is your district ruler?"
"Bartholomew Wilson."
"Hum! You seem glib enough in your tests. What are you doing here?"
"Working, the same as you--but a poorer job."
"You have your back answer quick enough."
"Yes, I was always quick of speech."
"Are you quick of action?"
"I have had that name among those that knew me best."
"Well, we may try you sooner than you think. Have you heard anything ofthe lodge in these parts?"
"I've heard that it takes a man to be a brother."
"True for you, Mr. McMurdo. Why did you leave Chicago?"
"I'm damned if I tell you that!"
McGinty opened his eyes. He was not used to being answered in suchfashion, and it amused him. "Why won't you tell me?"
"Because no brother may tell another a lie."
"Then the truth is too bad to tell?"
"You can put it that way if you like."
"See here, mister, you can't expect me, as Bodymaster, to pass into thelodge a man for whose past he can't answer."
McMurdo looked puzzled. Then he took a worn newspaper cutting from aninner pocket.
"You wouldn't squeal on a fellow?" said he.
"I'll wipe my hand across your face if you say such words to me!" criedMcGinty hotly.
"You are right, Councillor," said McMurdo meekly. "I should apologize.I spoke without thought. Well, I know that I am safe in your hands.Look at that clipping."
McGinty glanced his eyes over the account of the shooting of one JonasPinto, in the Lake Saloon, Market Street, Chicago, in the New Year weekof 1874.
"Your work?" he asked, as he handed back the paper.
McMurdo nodded.
"Why did you shoot him?"
"I was helping Uncle Sam to make dollars. Maybe mine were not as goodgold as his, but they looked as well and were cheaper to make. This manPinto helped me to shove the queer--"
"To do what?"
"Well, it means to pass the dollars out into circulation. Then he saidhe would split. Maybe he did split. I didn't wait to see. I just killedhim and lighted out for the coal country."
"Why the coal country?"
"'Cause I'd read in the papers that they weren't too particular inthose parts."
McGinty laughed. "You were first a coiner and then a murderer, and youcame to these parts because you thought you'd be welcome."
"That's about the size of it," McMurdo answered.
"Well, I guess you'll go far. Say, can you make those dollars yet?"
McMurdo took half a dozen from his pocket. "Those never passed thePhiladelphia mint," said he.
"You don't say!" McGinty held them to the light in his enormous hand,which was hairy as a gorilla's. "I can see no difference. Gar! you'llbe a mighty useful brother, I'm thinking! We can do with a bad man ortwo among us, Friend McMurdo: for there are times
when we have to takeour own part. We'd soon be against the wall if we didn't shove back atthose that were pushing us."
"Well, I guess I'll do my share of shoving with the rest of the boys."
"You seem to have a good nerve. You didn't squirm when I shoved thisgun at you."
"It was not me that was in danger."
"Who then?"
"It was you, Councillor." McMurdo drew a cocked pistol from the sidepocket of his peajacket. "I was covering you all the time. I guess myshot would have been as quick as yours."
"By Gar!" McGinty flushed an angry red and then burst into a roar oflaughter. "Say, we've had no such holy terror come to hand this many ayear. I reckon the lodge will learn to be proud of you.... Well, whatthe hell do you want? And can't I speak alone with a gentleman for fiveminutes but you must butt in on us?"
The bartender stood abashed. "I'm sorry, Councillor, but it's TedBaldwin. He says he must see you this very minute."
The message was unnecessary; for the set, cruel face of the man himselfwas looking over the servant's shoulder. He pushed the bartender outand closed the door on him.
"So," said he with a furious glance at McMurdo, "you got here first,did you? I've a word to say to you, Councillor, about this man."
"Then say it here and now before my face," cried McMurdo.
"I'll say it at my own time, in my own way."
"Tut! Tut!" said McGinty, getting off his barrel. "This will never do.We have a new brother here, Baldwin, and it's not for us to greet himin such fashion. Hold out your hand, man, and make it up!"
"Never!" cried Baldwin in a fury.
"I've offered to fight him if he thinks I have wronged him," saidMcMurdo. "I'll fight him with fists, or, if that won't satisfy him,I'll fight him any other way he chooses. Now, I'll leave it to you,Councillor, to judge between us as a Bodymaster should."
"What is it, then?"
"A young lady. She's free to choose for herself."
"Is she?" cried Baldwin.
"As between two brothers of the lodge I should say that she was," saidthe Boss.
"Oh, that's your ruling, is it?"
"Yes, it is, Ted Baldwin," said McGinty, with a wicked stare. "Is ityou that would dispute it?"
"You would throw over one that has stood by you this five years infavour of a man that you never saw before in your life? You're notBodymaster for life, Jack McGinty, and by God! when next it comes to avote--"
The Councillor sprang at him like a tiger. His hand closed round theother's neck, and he hurled him back across one of the barrels. In hismad fury he would have squeezed the life out of him if McMurdo had notinterfered.
"Easy, Councillor! For heaven's sake, go easy!" he cried, as he draggedhim back.
McGinty released his hold, and Baldwin, cowed and shaken gasping forbreath, and shivering in every limb, as one who has looked over thevery edge of death, sat up on the barrel over which he had been hurled.
"You've been asking for it this many a day, Ted Baldwin--now you've gotit!" cried McGinty, his huge chest rising and falling. "Maybe you thinkif I was voted down from Bodymaster you would find yourself in myshoes. It's for the lodge to say that. But so long as I am the chiefI'll have no man lift his voice against me or my rulings."
"I have nothing against you," mumbled Baldwin, feeling his throat.
"Well, then," cried the other, relapsing in a moment into a bluffjoviality, "we are all good friends again and there's an end of thematter."
He took a bottle of champagne down from the shelf and twisted out thecork.
"See now," he continued, as he filled three high glasses. "Let us drinkthe quarrelling toast of the lodge. After that, as you know, there canbe no bad blood between us. Now, then the left hand on the apple of mythroat. I say to you, Ted Baldwin, what is the offense, sir?"
"The clouds are heavy," answered Baldwin
"But they will forever brighten."
"And this I swear!"
The men drank their glasses, and the same ceremony was performedbetween Baldwin and McMurdo.
"There!" cried McGinty, rubbing his hands. "That's the end of the blackblood. You come under lodge discipline if it goes further, and that's aheavy hand in these parts, as Brother Baldwin knows--and as you willdamn soon find out, Brother McMurdo, if you ask for trouble!"
"Faith, I'd be slow to do that," said McMurdo. He held out his hand toBaldwin. "I'm quick to quarrel and quick to forgive. It's my hot Irishblood, they tell me. But it's over for me, and I bear no grudge."
Baldwin had to take the proffered hand, for the baleful eye of theterrible Boss was upon him. But his sullen face showed how little thewords of the other had moved him.
McGinty clapped them both on the shoulders. "Tut! These girls! Thesegirls!" he cried. "To think that the same petticoats should comebetween two of my boys! It's the devil's own luck! Well, it's thecolleen inside of them that must settle the question for it's outsidethe jurisdiction of a Bodymaster--and the Lord be praised for that! Wehave enough on us, without the women as well. You'll have to beaffiliated to Lodge 341, Brother McMurdo. We have our own ways andmethods, different from Chicago. Saturday night is our meeting, and ifyou come then, we'll make you free forever of the Vermissa Valley."
Chapter 3
Lodge 341, Vermissa
On the day following the evening which had contained so many excitingevents, McMurdo moved his lodgings from old Jacob Shafter's and took uphis quarters at the Widow MacNamara's on the extreme outskirts of thetown. Scanlan, his original acquaintance aboard the train, had occasionshortly afterwards to move into Vermissa, and the two lodged together.There was no other boarder, and the hostess was an easy-going oldIrishwoman who left them to themselves; so that they had a freedom forspeech and action welcome to men who had secrets in common.
Shafter had relented to the extent of letting McMurdo come to his mealsthere when he liked; so that his intercourse with Ettie was by no meansbroken. On the contrary, it drew closer and more intimate as the weekswent by.
In his bedroom at his new abode McMurdo felt it safe to take out thecoining moulds, and under many a pledge of secrecy a number of brothersfrom the lodge were allowed to come in and see them, each carrying awayin his pocket some examples of the false money, so cunningly struckthat there was never the slightest difficulty or danger in passing it.Why, with such a wonderful art at his command, McMurdo shouldcondescend to work at all was a perpetual mystery to his companions;though he made it clear to anyone who asked him that if he livedwithout any visible means it would very quickly bring the police uponhis track.
One policeman was indeed after him already; but the incident, as luckwould have it, did the adventurer a great deal more good than harm.After the first introduction there were few evenings when he did notfind his way to McGinty's saloon, there to make closer acquaintancewith "the boys," which was the jovial title by which the dangerous gangwho infested the place were known to one another. His dashing mannerand fearlessness of speech made him a favourite with them all; whilethe rapid and scientific way in which he polished off his antagonist inan "all in" bar-room scrap earned the respect of that rough community.Another incident, however, raised him even higher in their estimation.
Just at the crowded hour one night, the door opened and a man enteredwith the quiet blue uniform and peaked cap of the mine police. This wasa special body raised by the railways and colliery owners to supplementthe efforts of the ordinary civil police, who were perfectly helplessin the face of the organized ruffianism which terrorized the district.There was a hush as he entered, and many a curious glance was cast athim; but the relations between policemen and criminals are peculiar insome parts of the States, and McGinty himself standing behind hiscounter, showed no surprise when the policeman enrolled himself amonghis customers.
"A straight whisky, for the night is bitter," said the police officer."I don't think we have met before, Councillor?"
"You'll be the new captain?" said McGinty.
"That's so. We're looking to you, Councillor, and to the other leadingcitizens, to help us in upholding law and order in this township.Captain Marvin is my name."
"We'd do better without you, Captain Marvin," said McGinty coldly; "forwe have our own police of the township, and no need for any importedgoods. What are you but the paid tool of the capitalists, hired by themto club or shoot your poorer fellow citizen?"
"Well, well, we won't argue about that," said the police officergood-humouredly. "I expect we all do our duty same as we see it; but wecan't all see it the same." He had drunk off his glass and had turnedto go, when his eyes fell upon the face of Jack McMurdo, who wasscowling at his elbow. "Hullo! Hullo!" he cried, looking him up anddown. "Here's an old acquaintance!"
McMurdo shrank away from him. "I was never a friend to you nor anyother cursed copper in my life," said he.
"An acquaintance isn't always a friend," said the police captain,grinning. "You're Jack McMurdo of Chicago, right enough, and don't youdeny it!"
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "I'm not denying it," said he. "D'yethink I'm ashamed of my own name?"
"You've got good cause to be, anyhow."
"What the devil d'you mean by that?" he roared with his fists clenched.
"No, no, Jack, bluster won't do with me. I was an officer in Chicagobefore ever I came to this darned coal bunker, and I know a Chicagocrook when I see one."
McMurdo's face fell. "Don't tell me that you're Marvin of the ChicagoCentral!" he cried.
"Just the same old Teddy Marvin, at your service. We haven't forgottenthe shooting of Jonas Pinto up there."
"I never shot him."
"Did you not? That's good impartial evidence, ain't it? Well, his deathcame in uncommon handy for you, or they would have had you for shovingthe queer. Well, we can let that be bygones; for, between you andme--and perhaps I'm going further than my duty in saying it--they couldget no clear case against you, and Chicago's open to you to-morrow."
"I'm very well where I am."
"Well, I've given you the pointer, and you're a sulky dog not to thankme for it."
"Well, I suppose you mean well, and I do thank you," said McMurdo in novery gracious manner.
"It's mum with me so long as I see you living on the straight," saidthe captain. "But, by the Lord! if you get off after this, it's anotherstory! So good-night to you--and goodnight, Councillor."
He left the bar-room; but not before he had created a local hero.McMurdo's deeds in far Chicago had been whispered before. He had putoff all questions with a smile, as one who did not wish to havegreatness thrust upon him. But now the thing was officially confirmed.The bar loafers crowded round him and shook him heartily by the hand.He was free of the community from that time on. He could drink hard andshow little trace of it; but that evening, had his mate Scanlan notbeen at hand to lead him home, the feted hero would surely have spenthis night under the bar.
On a Saturday night McMurdo was introduced to the lodge. He had thoughtto pass in without ceremony as being an initiate of Chicago; but therewere particular rites in Vermissa of which they were proud, and thesehad to be undergone by every postulant. The assembly met in a largeroom reserved for such purposes at the Union House. Some sixty membersassembled at Vermissa; but that by no means represented the fullstrength of the organization, for there were several other lodges inthe valley, and others across the mountains on each side, who exchangedmembers when any serious business was afoot, so that a crime might bedone by men who were strangers to the locality. Altogether there werenot less than five hundred scattered over the coal district.
In the bare assembly room the men were gathered round a long table. Atthe side was a second one laden with bottles and glasses, on which somemembers of the company were already turning their eyes. McGinty sat atthe head with a flat black velvet cap upon his shock of tangled blackhair, and a coloured purple stole round his neck, so that he seemed tobe a priest presiding over some diabolical ritual. To right and left ofhim were the higher lodge officials, the cruel, handsome face of TedBaldwin among them. Each of these wore some scarf or medallion asemblem of his office.
They were, for the most part, men of mature age; but the rest of thecompany consisted of young fellows from eighteen to twenty-five, theready and capable agents who carried out the commands of their seniors.Among the older men were many whose features showed the tigerish,lawless souls within; but looking at the rank and file it was difficultto believe that these eager and open-faced young fellows were in verytruth a dangerous gang of murderers, whose minds had suffered suchcomplete moral perversion that they took a horrible pride in theirproficiency at the business, and looked with deepest respect at the manwho had the reputation of making what they called "a clean job."
To their contorted natures it had become a spirited and chivalrousthing to volunteer for service against some man who had never injuredthem, and whom in many cases they had never seen in their lives. Thecrime committed, they quarrelled as to who had actually struck thefatal blow, and amused one another and the company by describing thecries and contortions of the murdered man.
At first they had shown some secrecy in their arrangements; but at thetime which this narrative describes their proceedings wereextraordinarily open, for th
e repeated failures of the law had provedto them that, on the one hand, no one would dare to witness againstthem, and on the other they had an unlimited number of stanch witnessesupon whom they could call, and a well-filled treasure chest from whichthey could draw the funds to engage the best legal talent in the state.In ten long years of outrage there had been no single conviction, andthe only danger that ever threatened the Scowrers lay in the victimhimself--who, however outnumbered and taken by surprise, might andoccasionally did leave his mark upon his assailants.
McMurdo had been warned that some ordeal lay before him; but no onewould tell him in what it consisted. He was led now into an outer roomby two solemn brothers. Through the plank partition he could hear themurmur of many voices from the assembly within. Once or twice he caughtthe sound of his own name, and he knew that they were discussing hiscandidacy. Then there entered an inner guard with a green and gold sashacross his chest.
"The Bodymaster orders that he shall be trussed, blinded, and entered,"said he.
The three of them removed his coat, turned up the sleeve of his rightarm, and finally passed a rope round above the elbows and made it fast.They next placed a thick black cap right over his head and the upperpart of his face, so that he could see nothing. He was then led intothe assembly hall.
It was pitch dark and very oppressive under his hood. He heard therustle and murmur of the people round him, and then the voice ofMcGinty sounded dull and distant through the covering of his ears.
"John McMurdo," said the voice, "are you already a member of theAncient Order of Freemen?"
He bowed in assent.
"Is your lodge No. 29, Chicago?"
He bowed again.
"Dark nights are unpleasant," said the voice.
"Yes, for strangers to travel," he answered.
"The clouds are heavy."
"Yes, a storm is approaching."
"Are the brethren satisfied?" asked the Bodymaster.
There was a general murmur of assent.
"We know, Brother, by your sign and by your countersign that you areindeed one of us," said McGinty. "We would have you know, however, thatin this county and in other counties of these parts we have certainrites, and also certain duties of our own which call for good men. Areyou ready to be tested?"
"I am."
"Are you of stout heart?"
"I am."
"Take a stride forward to prove it."
As the words were said he felt two hard points in front of his eyes,pressing upon them so that it appeared as if he could not move forwardwithout a danger of losing them. None the less, he nerved himself tostep resolutely out, and as he did so the pressure melted away. Therewas a low murmur of applause.
"He is of stout heart," said the voice. "Can you bear pain?"
"As well as another," he answered.
"Test him!"
It was all he could do to keep himself from screaming out, for anagonizing pain shot through his forearm. He nearly fainted at thesudden shock of it; but he bit his lip and clenched his hands to hidehis agony.
"I can take more than that," said he.
This time there was loud applause. A finer first appearance had neverbeen made in the lodge. Hands clapped him on the back, and the hood wasplucked from his head. He stood blinking and smiling amid thecongratulations of the brothers.
"One last word, Brother McMurdo," said McGinty. "You have already swornthe oath of secrecy and fidelity, and you are aware that the punishmentfor any breach of it is instant and inevitable death?"
"I am," said McMurdo.
"And you accept the rule of the Bodymaster for the time being under allcircumstances?"
"I do."
"Then in the name of Lodge 341, Vermissa, I welcome you to itsprivileges and debates. You will put the liquor on the table, BrotherScanlan, and we will drink to our worthy brother."
McMurdo's coat had been brought to him; but before putting it on heexamined his right arm, which still smarted heavily. There on the fleshof the forearm was a circle with a triangle within it, deep and red, asthe branding iron had left it. One or two of his neighbours pulled uptheir sleeves and showed their own lodge marks.
"We've all had it," said one; "but not all as brave as you over it."
"Tut! It was nothing," said he; but it burned and ached all the same.
When the drinks which followed the ceremony of initiation had all beendisposed of, the business of the lodge proceeded. McMurdo, accustomedonly to the prosaic performances of Chicago, listened with open earsand more surprise than he ventured to show to what followed.
"The first business on the agenda paper," said McGinty, "is to read thefollowing letter from Division Master Windle of Merton County Lodge249. He says:
"DEAR SIR:
"There is a job to be done on Andrew Rae of Rae &     Sturmash, coal owners near this place. You will remember     that your lodge owes us a return, having had the service of     two brethren in the matter of the patrolman last fall. You     will send two good men, they will be taken charge of by     Treasurer Higgins of this lodge, whose address you know.     He will show them when to act and where. Yours in freedom,
"J. W. WINDLE D. M. A. O. F.
"Windle has never refused us when we have had occasion to ask for theloan of a man or two, and it is not for us to refuse him." McGintypaused and looked round the room with his dull, malevolent eyes. "Whowill volunteer for the job?"
Several young fellows held up their hands. The Bodymaster looked atthem with an approving smile.
"You'll do, Tiger Cormac. If you handle it as well as you did the last,you won't be wrong. And you, Wilson."
"I've no pistol," said the volunteer, a mere boy in his teens.
"It's your first, is it not? Well, you have to be blooded some time. Itwill be a great start for you. As to the pistol, you'll find it waitingfor you, or I'm mistaken. If you report yourselves on Monday, it willbe time enough. You'll get a great welcome when you return."
"Any reward this time?" asked Cormac, a thick-set, dark-faced,brutal-looking young man, whose ferocity had earned him the nickname of"Tiger."
"Never mind the reward. You just do it for the honour of the thing.Maybe when it is done there will be a few odd dollars at the bottom ofthe box."
"What has the man done?" asked young Wilson.
"Sure, it's not for the likes of you to ask what the man has done. Hehas been judged over there. That's no business of ours. All we have todo is to carry it out for them, same as they would for us. Speaking ofthat, two brothers from the Merton lodge are coming over to us nextweek to do some business in this quarter."
"Who are they?" asked someone.
"Faith, it is wiser not to ask. If you know nothing, you can testifynothing, and no trouble can come of it. But they are men who will makea clean job when they are about it."
"And time, too!" cried Ted Baldwin. "Folk are gettin' out of hand inthese parts. It was only last week that three of our men were turnedoff by Foreman Blaker. It's been owing him a long time, and he'll getit full and proper."
"Get what?" McMurdo whispered to his neighbour.
"The business end of a buckshot cartridge!" cried the man with a loudlaugh. "What think you of our ways, Brother?"
McMurdo's criminal soul seemed to have already absorbed the spirit ofthe vile association of which he was now a member. "I like it well,"said he. "'Tis a proper place for a lad of mettle."
Several of those who sat around heard his words and applauded them.
"What's that?" cried the black-maned Bodymaster from the end of thetable.
"'Tis our new brother, sir, who finds our ways to his taste."
McMurdo rose to his feet for an instant. "I would say, EminentBodymaster, that if a man should be wanted I should take it as anhonour to be chosen to help the lodge."
There was great applause at this. It was felt that a new sun waspushing its rim above the horizon. To some of the elders it seemed thatthe progress was a l
ittle too rapid.
"I would move," said the secretary, Harraway, a vulture-faced oldgraybeard who sat near the chairman, "that Brother McMurdo should waituntil it is the good pleasure of the lodge to employ him."
"Sure, that was what I meant; I'm in your hands," said McMurdo.
"Your time will come, Brother," said the chairman. "We have marked youdown as a willing man, and we believe that you will do good work inthese parts. There is a small matter to-night in which you may take ahand if it so please you."
"I will wait for something that is worth while."
"You can come to-night, anyhow, and it will help you to know what westand for in this community. I will make the announcement later.Meanwhile," he glanced at his agenda paper, "I have one or two morepoints to bring before the meeting. First of all, I will ask thetreasurer as to our bank balance. There is the pension to JimCarnaway's widow. He was struck down doing the work of the lodge, andit is for us to see that she is not the loser."
"Jim was shot last month when they tried to kill Chester Wilcox ofMarley Creek," McMurdo's neighbour informed him.
"The funds are good at the moment," said the treasurer, with thebankbook in front of him. "The firms have been generous of late. MaxLinder & Co. paid five hundred to be left alone. Walker Brothers sentin a hundred; but I took it on myself to return it and ask for five. IfI do not hear by Wednesday, their winding gear may get out of order. Wehad to burn their breaker last year before they became reasonable. Thenthe West Section Coaling Company has paid its annual contribution. Wehave enough on hand to meet any obligations."
"What about Archie Swindon?" asked a brother.
"He has sold out and left the district. The old devil left a note forus to say that he had rather be a free crossing sweeper in New Yorkthan a large mine owner under the power of a ring of blackmailers. ByGar! it was as well that he made a break for it before the note reachedus! I guess he won't show his face in this valley again."
An elderly, clean-shaved man with a kindly face and a good brow rosefrom the end of the table which faced the chairman. "Mr. Treasurer," heasked, "may I ask who has bought the property of this man that we havedriven out of the district?"
"Yes, Brother Morris. It has been bought by the State & Merton CountyRailroad Company."
"And who bought the mines of Todman and of Lee that came into themarket in the same way last year?"
"The same company, Brother Morris."
"And who bought the ironworks of Manson and of Shuman and of Van Deherand of Atwood, which have all been given up of late?"
"They were all bought by the West Gilmerton General Mining Company."
"I don't see, Brother Morris," said the chairman, "that it matters tous who buys them, since they can't carry them out of the district."
"With all respect to you, Eminent Bodymaster, I think it may mattervery much to us. This process has been going on now for ten long years.We are gradually driving all the small men out of trade. What is theresult? We find in their places great companies like the Railroad orthe General Iron, who have their directors in New York or Philadelphia,and care nothing for our threats. We can take it out of their localbosses, but it only means that others will be sent in their stead. Andwe are making it dangerous for ourselves. The small men could not harmus. They had not the money nor the power. So long as we did not squeezethem too dry, they would stay on under our power. But if these bigcompanies find that we stand between them and their profits, they willspare no pains and no expense to hunt us down and bring us to court."
There was a hush at these ominous words, and every face darkened asgloomy looks were exchanged. So omnipotent and unchallenged had theybeen that the very thought that there was possible retribution in thebackground had been banished from their minds. And yet the idea strucka chill to the most reckless of them.
"It is my advice," the speaker continued, "that we go easier upon thesmall men. On the day that they have all been driven out the power ofthis society will have been broken."
Unwelcome truths are not popular. There were angry cries as the speakerresumed his seat. McGinty rose with gloom upon his brow.
"Brother Morris," said he, "you were always a croaker. So long as themembers of this lodge stand together there is no power in the UnitedStates that can touch them. Sure, have we not tried it often enough inthe law courts? I expect the big companies will find it easier to paythan to fight, same as the little companies do. And now, Brethren,"McGinty took off his black velvet cap and his stole as he spoke, "thislodge has finished its business for the evening, save for one smallmatter which may be mentioned when we are parting. The time has nowcome for fraternal refreshment and for harmony."
Strange indeed is human nature. Here were these men, to whom murder wasfamiliar, who again and again had struck down the father of the family,some man against whom they had no personal feeling, without one thoughtof compunction or of compassion for his weeping wife or helplesschildren, and yet the tender or pathetic in music could move them totears. McMurdo had a fine tenor voice, and if he had failed to gain thegood will of the lodge before, it could no longer have been withheldafter he had thrilled them with "I'm Sitting on the Stile, Mary," and"On the Banks of Allan Water."
In his very first night the new recruit had made himself one of themost popular of the brethren, marked already for advancement and highoffice. There were other qualities needed, however, besides those ofgood fellowship, to make a worthy Freeman, and of these he was given anexample before the evening was over. The whisky bottle had passed roundmany times, and the men were flushed and ripe for mischief when theirBodymaster rose once more to address them.
"Boys," said he, "there's one man in this town that wants trimming up,and it's for you to see that he gets it. I'm speaking of James Stangerof the Herald. You've seen how he's been opening his mouth against usagain?"
There was a murmur of assent, with many a muttered oath. McGinty took aslip of paper from his waistcoat pocket.
"LAW AND ORDER!
That's how he heads it.
"REIGN OF TERROR IN THE COAL AND IRON DISTRICT
"Twelve years have now elapsed since the first assassinations   which proved the existence of a criminal organization in our   midst. From that day these outrages have never ceased, until   now they have reached a pitch which makes us the opprobrium   of the civilized world. Is it for such results as this that   our great country welcomes to its bosom the alien who flies   from the despotisms of Europe? Is it that they shall   themselves become tyrants over the very men who have given   them shelter, and that a state of terrorism and lawlessness   should be established under the very shadow of the sacred   folds of the starry Flag of Freedom which would raise horror   in our minds if we read of it as existing under the most   effete monarchy of the East? The men are known. The organization   is patent and public. How long are we to endure it? Can we   forever live--"
"Sure, I've read enough of the slush!" cried the chairman, tossing thepaper down upon the table. "That's what he says of us. The question I'masking you is what shall we say to him?"
"Kill him!" cried a dozen fierce voices.
"I protest against that," said Brother Morris, the man of the good browand shaved face. "I tell you, Brethren, that our hand is too heavy inthis valley, and that there will come a point where in self-defenseevery man will unite to crush us out. James Stanger is an old man. Heis respected in the township and the district. His paper stands for allthat is solid in the valley. If that man is struck down, there will bea stir through this state that will only end with our destruction."
"And how would they bring about our destruction, Mr. Standback?" criedMcGinty. "Is it by the police? Sure, half of them are in our pay andhalf of them afraid of us. Or is it by the law courts and the judge?Haven't we tried that before now, and what ever came of it?"
"There is a Judge Lynch that might try the case," said Brother Morris.
A general shout of anger greeted the suggestion.
&nb
sp; "I have but to raise my finger," cried McGinty, "and I could put twohundred men into this town that would clear it out from end to end."Then suddenly raising his voice and bending his huge black brows into aterrible frown, "See here, Brother Morris, I have my eye on you, andhave had for some time! You've no heart yourself, and you try to takethe heart out of others. It will be an ill day for you, Brother Morris,when your own name comes on our agenda paper, and I'm thinking thatit's just there that I ought to place it."
Morris had turned deadly pale, and his knees seemed to give way underhim as he fell back into his chair. He raised his glass in histrembling hand and drank before he could answer. "I apologize, EminentBodymaster, to you and to every brother in this lodge if I have saidmore than I should. I am a faithful member--you all know that--and itis my fear lest evil come to the lodge which makes me speak in anxiouswords. But I have greater trust in your judgment than in my own,Eminent Bodymaster, and I promise you that I will not offend again."
The Bodymaster's scowl relaxed as he listened to the humble words."Very good, Brother Morris. It's myself that would be sorry if it wereneedful to give you a lesson. But so long as I am in this chair weshall be a united lodge in word and in deed. And now, boys," hecontinued, looking round at the company, "I'll say this much, that ifStanger got his full deserts there would be more trouble than we needask for. These editors hang together, and every journal in the statewould be crying out for police and troops. But I guess you can give hima pretty severe warning. Will you fix it, Brother Baldwin?"
"Sure!" said the young man eagerly.
"How many will you take?"
"Half a dozen, and two to guard the door. You'll come, Gower, and you,Mansel, and you, Scanlan, and the two Willabys."
"I promised the new brother he should go," said the chairman.
Ted Baldwin looked at McMurdo with eyes which showed that he had notforgotten nor forgiven. "Well, he can come if he wants," he said in asurly voice. "That's enough. The sooner we get to work the better."
The company broke up with shouts and yells and snatches of drunkensong. The bar was still crowded with revellers, and many of thebrethren remained there. The little band who had been told off for dutypassed out into the street, proceeding in twos and threes along thesidewalk so as not to provoke attention. It was a bitterly cold night,with a half-moon shining brilliantly in a frosty, star-spangled sky.The men stopped and gathered in a yard which faced a high building. Thewords "Vermissa Herald" were printed in gold lettering between thebrightly lit windows. From within came the clanking of the printingpress.
"Here, you," said Baldwin to McMurdo, "you can stand below at the doorand see that the road is kept open for us. Arthur Willaby can stay withyou. You others come with me. Have no fears, boys; for we have a dozenwitnesses that we are in the Union Bar at this very moment."
It was nearly midnight, and the street was deserted save for one or tworevellers upon their way home. The party crossed the road, and, pushingopen the door of the newspaper office, Baldwin and his men rushed inand up the stair which faced them. McMurdo and another remained below.From the room above came a shout, a cry for help, and then the sound oftrampling feet and of falling chairs. An instant later a gray-hairedman rushed out on the landing.
He was seized before he could get farther, and his spectacles cametinkling down to McMurdo's feet. There was a thud and a groan. He wason his face, and half a dozen sticks were clattering together as theyfell upon him. He writhed, and his long, thin limbs quivered under theblows. The others ceased at last; but Baldwin, his cruel face set in aninfernal smile, was hacking at the man's head, which he vainlyendeavoured to defend with his arms. His white hair was dabbled withpatches of blood. Baldwin was still stooping over his victim, puttingin a short, vicious blow whenever he could see a part exposed, whenMcMurdo dashed up the stair and pushed him back.
"You'll kill the man," said he. "Drop it!"
Baldwin looked at him in amazement. "Curse you!" he cried. "Who are youto interfere--you that are new to the lodge? Stand back!" He raised hisstick; but McMurdo had whipped his pistol out of his hip pocket.
"Stand back yourself!" he cried. "I'll blow your face in if you lay ahand on me. As to the lodge, wasn't it the order of the Bodymaster thatthe man was not to be killed--and what are you doing but killing him?"
"It's truth he says," remarked one of the men.
"By Gar! you'd best hurry yourselves!" cried the man below. "Thewindows are all lighting up, and you'll have the whole town here insideof five minutes."
There was indeed the sound of shouting in the street, and a littlegroup of compositors and pressmen was forming in the hall below andnerving itself to action. Leaving the limp and motionless body of theeditor at the head of the stair, the criminals rushed down and madetheir way swiftly along the street. Having reached the Union House,some of them mixed with the crowd in McGinty's saloon, whisperingacross the bar to the Boss that the job had been well carried through.Others, and among them McMurdo, broke away into side streets, and so bydevious paths to their own homes.
Chapter 4
The Valley of Fear
When McMurdo awoke next morning he had good reason to remember hisinitiation into the lodge. His head ached with the effect of the drink,and his arm, where he had been branded, was hot and swollen. Having hisown peculiar source of income, he was irregular in his attendance athis work; so he had a late breakfast, and remained at home for themorning writing a long letter to a friend. Afterwards he read the DailyHerald. In a special column put in at the last moment he read:
OUTRAGE AT THE HERALD OFFICE--EDITOR                   SERIOUSLY INJURED.
It was a short account of the facts with which he was himself morefamiliar than the writer could have been. It ended with the statement:
The matter is now in the hands of the police; but it can    hardly be hoped that their exertions will be attended by any    better results than in the past. Some of the men were    recognized, and there is hope that a conviction may be    obtained. The source of the outrage was, it need hardly be    said, that infamous society which has held this community    in bondage for so long a period, and against which the    Herald has taken so uncompromising a stand. Mr. Stanger's    many friends will rejoice to hear that, though he has been    cruelly and brutally beaten, and though he has sustained    severe injuries about the head, there is no immediate danger    to his life.
Below it stated that a guard of police, armed with Winchester rifles,had been requisitioned for the defense of the office.
McMurdo had laid down the paper, and was lighting his pipe with a handwhich was shaky from the excesses of the previous evening, when therewas a knock outside, and his landlady brought to him a note which hadjust been handed in by a lad. It was unsigned, and ran thus:
I should wish to speak to you, but would rather not do so    in your house. You will find me beside the flagstaff upon    Miller Hill. If you will come there now, I have something    which it is important for you to hear and for me to say.
McMurdo read the note twice with the utmost surprise; for he could notimagine what it meant or who was the author of it. Had it been in afeminine hand, he might have imagined that it was the beginning of oneof those adventures which had been familiar enough in his past life.But it was the writing of a man, and of a well educated one, too.Finally, after some hesitation, he determined to see the matter through.
Miller Hill is an ill-kept public park in the very centre of the town.In summer it is a favourite resort of the people; but in winter it isdesolate enough. From the top of it one has a view not only of thewhole straggling, grimy town, but of the winding valley beneath, withits scattered mines and factories blackening the snow on each side ofit, and of the wooded and white-capped ranges flanking it.
McMurdo strolled up the winding path hedged in with evergreens until hereached the deserted restaurant which forms the centre of summergaiety. Beside it was a bare flagstaff, and underneath it a man, hishat drawn down and the collar of his overcoat turned up. When he turnedhis face McMurdo saw that it was Brother Morris, he who had incurredthe anger of the Bodymaster the night before. The lodge sign was givenand exchanged as they met.
"I wanted to have a word with you, Mr. McMurdo," said the older man,speaking with a hesitation which showed that he was on delicate ground."It was kind of you to come."
"Why did you not put your name to the note?"
"One has to be cautious, mister. One never knows in times like thesehow a thing may come back to one. One never knows either who to trustor who not to trust."
"Surely one may trust brothers of the lodge."
"No, no, not always," cried Morris with vehemence. "Whatever we say,even what we think, seems to go back to that man McGinty."
"Look here!" said McMurdo sternly. "It was only last night, as you knowwell, that I swore good faith to our Bodymaster. Would you be asking meto break my oath?"
"If that is the view you take," said Morris sadly, "I can only say thatI am sorry I gave you the trouble to come and meet me. Things have cometo a bad pass when two free citizens cannot speak their thoughts toeach other."
McMurdo, who had been watching his companion very narrowly, relaxedsomewhat in his bearing. "Sure I spoke for myself only," said he. "I ama newcomer, as you know, and I am strange to it all. It is not for meto open my mouth, Mr. Morris, and if you think well to say anything tome I am here to hear it."
"And to take it back to Boss McGinty!" said Morris bitterly.
"Indeed, then, you do me injustice there," cried McMurdo. "For myself Iam loyal to the lodge, and so I tell you straight; but I would be apoor creature if I were to repeat to any other what you might say to mein confidence. It will go no further than me; though I warn you thatyou may get neither help nor sympathy."
"I have given up looking for either the one or the other," said Morris."I may be putting my very life in your hands by what I say; but, bad asyou are--and it seemed to me last night that you were shaping to be asbad as the worst--still you are new to it, and your conscience cannotyet be as hardened as theirs. That was why I thought to speak with you."
"Well, what have you to say?"
"If you give me away, may a curse be on you!"
"Sure, I said I would not."
"I would ask you, then, when you joined the Freeman's society inChicago and swore vows of charity and fidelity, did ever it cross yourmind that you might find it would lead you to crime?"
"If you call it crime," McMurdo answered.
"Call it crime!" cried Morris, his voice vibrating with passion. "Youhave seen little of it if you can call it anything else. Was it crimelast night when a man old enough to be your father was beaten till theblood dripped from his white hairs? Was that crime--or what else wouldyou call it?"
"There are some would say it was war," said McMurdo, "a war of twoclasses with all in, so that each struck as best it could."
"Well, did you think of such a thing when you joined the Freeman'ssociety at Chicago?"
"No, I'm bound to say I did not."
"Nor did I when I joined it at Philadelphia. It was just a benefit cluband a meeting place for one's fellows. Then I heard of thisplace--curse the hour that the name first fell upon my ears!--and Icame to better myself! My God! to better myself! My wife and threechildren came with me. I started a dry goods store on Market Square,and I prospered well. The word had gone round that I was a Freeman, andI was forced to join the local lodge, same as you did last night. I'vethe badge of shame on my forearm and something worse branded on myheart. I found that I was under the orders of a black villain andcaught in a meshwork of crime. What could I do? Every word I said tomake things better was taken as treason, same as it was last night. Ican't get away; for all I have in the world is in my store. If I leavethe society, I know well that it means murder to me, and God knows whatto my wife and children. Oh, man, it is awful--awful!" He put his handsto his face, and his body shook with convulsive sobs.
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "You were too soft for the job," saidhe. "You are the wrong sort for such work."
"I had a conscience and a religion; but they made me a criminal amongthem. I was chosen for a job. If I backed down I knew well what wouldcome to me. Maybe I'm a coward. Maybe it's the thought of my poorlittle woman and the children that makes me one. Anyhow I went. I guessit will haunt me forever.
"It was a lonely house, twenty miles from here, over the range yonder.I was told off for the door, same as you were last night. They couldnot trust me with the job. The others went in. When they came out theirhands were crimson to the wrists. As we turned away a child wasscreaming out of the house behind us. It was a boy of five who had seenhis father murdered. I nearly fainted with the horror of it, and yet Ihad to keep a bold and smiling face; for well I knew that if I did notit would be out of my house that they would come next with their bloodyhands and it would be my little Fred that would be screaming for hisfather.
"But I was a criminal then, part sharer in a murder, lost forever inthis world, and lost also in the next. I a
m a good Catholic; but thepriest would have no word with me when he heard I was a Scowrer, and Iam excommunicated from my faith. That's how it stands with me. And Isee you going down the same road, and I ask you what the end is to be.Are you ready to be a cold-blooded murderer also, or can we do anythingto stop it?"
"What would you do?" asked McMurdo abruptly. "You would not inform?"
"God forbid!" cried Morris. "Sure, the very thought would cost me mylife."
"That's well," said McMurdo. "I'm thinking that you are a weak man andthat you make too much of the matter."
"Too much! Wait till you have lived here longer. Look down the valley!See the cloud of a hundred chimneys that overshadows it! I tell youthat the cloud of murder hangs thicker and lower than that over theheads of the people. It is the Valley of Fear, the Valley of Death. Theterror is in the hearts of the people from the dusk to the dawn. Wait,young man, and you will learn for yourself."
"Well, I'll let you know what I think when I have seen more," saidMcMurdo carelessly. "What is very clear is that you are not the man forthe place, and that the sooner you sell out--if you only get a dime adollar for what the business is worth--the better it will be for you.What you have said is safe with me; but, by Gar! if I thought you werean informer--"
"No, no!" cried Morris piteously.
"Well, let it rest at that. I'll bear what you have said in mind, andmaybe some day I'll come back to it. I expect you meant kindly byspeaking to me like this. Now I'll be getting home."
"One word before you go," said Morris. "We may have been seen together.They may want to know what we have spoken about."
"Ah! that's well thought of."
"I offer you a clerkship in my store."
"And I refuse it. That's our business. Well, so long, Brother Morris,and may you find things go better with you in the future."
That same afternoon, as McMurdo sat smoking, lost in thought beside thestove of his sitting-room, the door swung open and its framework wasfilled with the huge figure of Boss McGinty. He passed the sign, andthen seating himself opposite to the young man he looked at himsteadily for some time, a look which was as steadily returned.
"I'm not much of a visitor, Brother McMurdo," he said at last. "I guessI am too busy over the folk that visit me. But I thought I'd stretch apoint and drop down to see you in your own house."
"I'm proud to see you here, Councillor," McMurdo answered heartily,bringing his whisky bottle out of the cupboard. "It's an honour that Ihad not expected."
"How's the arm?" asked the Boss.
McMurdo made a wry face. "Well, I'm not forgetting it," he said; "butit's worth it."
"Yes, it's worth it," the other answered, "to those that are loyal andgo through with it and are a help to the lodge. What were you speakingto Brother Morris about on Miller Hill this morning?"
The question came so suddenly that it was well that he had his answerprepared. He burst into a hearty laugh. "Morris didn't know I couldearn a living here at home. He shan't know either; for he has got toomuch conscience for the likes of me. But he's a good-hearted old chap.It was his idea that I was at a loose end, and that he would do me agood turn by offering me a clerkship in a dry goods store."
"Oh, that was it?"
"Yes, that was it."
"And you refused it?"
"Sure. Couldn't I earn ten times as much in my own bedroom with fourhours' work?"
"That's so. But I wouldn't get about too much with Morris."
"Why not?"
"Well, I guess because I tell you not. That's enough for most folk inthese parts."
"It may be enough for most folk; but it ain't enough for me,Councillor," said McMurdo boldly. "If you are a judge of men, you'llknow that."
The swarthy giant glared at him, and his hairy paw closed for aninstant round the glass as though he would hurl it at the head of hiscompanion. Then he laughed in his loud, boisterous, insincere fashion.
"You're a queer card, for sure," said he. "Well, if you want reasons,I'll give them. Did Morris say nothing to you against the lodge?"
"No."
"Nor against me?"
"No."
"Well, that's because he daren't trust you. But in his heart he is nota loyal brother. We know that well. So we watch him and we wait for thetime to admonish him. I'm thinking that the time is drawing near.There's no room for scabby sheep in our pen. But if you keep companywith a disloyal man, we might think that you were disloyal, too. See?"
"There's no chance of my keeping company with him; for I dislike theman," McMurdo answered. "As to being disloyal, if it was any man butyou he would not use the word to me twice."
"Well, that's enough," said McGinty, draining off his glass. "I camedown to give you a word in season, and you've had it."
"I'd like to know," said McMurdo, "how you ever came to learn that Ihad spoken with Morris at all?"
McGinty laughed. "It's my business to know what goes on in thistownship," said he. "I guess you'd best reckon on my hearing all thatpasses. Well, time's up, and I'll just say--"
But his leavetaking was cut short in a very unexpected fashion. With asudden crash the door flew open, and three frowning, intent facesglared in at them from under the peaks of police caps. McMurdo sprangto his feet and half drew his revolver; but his arm stopped midway ashe became conscious that two Winchester rifles were levelled at hishead. A man in uniform advanced into the room, a six-shooter in hishand. It was Captain Marvin, once of Chicago, and now of the MineConstabulary. He shook his head with a half-smile at McMurdo.
"I thought you'd be getting into trouble, Mr. Crooked McMurdo ofChicago," said he. "Can't keep out of it, can you? Take your hat andcome along with us."
"I guess you'll pay for this, Captain Marvin," said McGinty. "Who areyou, I'd like to know, to break into a house in this fashion and molesthonest, law-abiding men?"
"You're standing out in this deal, Councillor McGinty," said the policecaptain. "We are not out after you, but after this man McMurdo. It isfor you to help, not to hinder us in our duty."
"He is a friend of mine, and I'll answer for his conduct," said theBoss.
"By all accounts, Mr. McGinty, you may have to answer for your ownconduct some of these days," the captain answered. "This man McMurdowas a crook before ever he came here, and he's a crook still. Coverhim, Patrolman, while I disarm him."
"There's my pistol," said McMurdo coolly. "Maybe, Captain Marvin, ifyou and I were alone and face to face you would not take me so easily."
"Where's your warrant?" asked McGinty. "By Gar! a man might as welllive in Russia as in Vermissa while folk like you are running thepolice. It's a capitalist outrage, and you'll hear more of it, Ireckon."
"You do what you think is your duty the best way you can, Councillor.We'll look after ours."
"What am I accused of?" asked McMurdo.
"Of being concerned in the beating of old Editor Stanger at the Heraldoffice. It wasn't your fault that it isn't a murder charge."
"Well, if that's all you have against him," cried McGinty with a laugh,"you can save yourself a deal of trouble by dropping it right now. Thisman was with me in my saloon playing poker up to midnight, and I canbring a dozen to prove it."
"That's your affair, and I guess you can settle it in court to-morrow.Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and come quietly if you don't want a gunacross your head. You stand wide, Mr. McGinty; for I warn you I willstand no resistance when I am on duty!"
So determined was the appearance of the captain that both McMurdo andhis boss were forced to accept the situation. The latter managed tohave a few whispered words with the prisoner before they parted.
"What about--" he jerked his thumb upward to signify the coining plant.
"All right," whispered McMurdo, who had devised a safe hiding placeunder the floor.
"I'll bid you good-bye," said the Boss, shaking hands. "I'll see Reillythe lawyer and take the defense upon myself. Take my word for it thatthey won't be able to hold you."
"I wouldn't
bet on that. Guard the prisoner, you two, and shoot him ifhe tries any games. I'll search the house before I leave."
He did so; but apparently found no trace of the concealed plant. Whenhe had descended he and his men escorted McMurdo to headquarters.Darkness had fallen, and a keen blizzard was blowing so that thestreets were nearly deserted; but a few loiterers followed the group,and emboldened by invisibility shouted imprecations at the prisoner.
"Lynch the cursed Scowrer!" they cried. "Lynch him!" They laughed andjeered as he was pushed into the police station. After a short, formalexamination from the inspector in charge he was put into the commoncell. Here he found Baldwin and three other criminals of the nightbefore, all arrested that afternoon and waiting their trial nextmorning.
But even within this inner fortress of the law the long arm of theFreemen was able to extend. Late at night there came a jailer with astraw bundle for their bedding, out of which he extracted two bottlesof whisky, some glasses, and a pack of cards. They spent a hilariousnight, without an anxious thought as to the ordeal of the morning.
Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. The magistrate could notpossibly, on the evidence, have held them for a higher court. On theone hand the compositors and pressmen were forced to admit that thelight was uncertain, that they were themselves much perturbed, and thatit was difficult for them to swear to the identity of the assailants;although they believed that the accused were among them. Cross examinedby the clever attorney who had been engaged by McGinty, they were evenmore nebulous in their evidence.
The injured man had already deposed that he was so taken by surprise bythe suddenness of the attack that he could state nothing beyond thefact that the first man who struck him wore a moustache. He added thathe knew them to be Scowrers, since no one else in the community couldpossibly have any enmity to him, and he had long been threatened onaccount of his outspoken editorials. On the other hand, it was clearlyshown by the united and unfaltering evidence of six citizens, includingthat high municipal official, Councillor McGinty, that the men had beenat a card party at the Union House until an hour very much later thanthe commission of the outrage.
Needless to say that they were discharged with something very near toan apology from the bench for the inconvenience to which they had beenput, together with an implied censure of Captain Marvin and the policefor their officious zeal.
The verdict was greeted with loud applause by a court in which McMurdosaw many familiar faces. Brothers of the lodge smiled and waved. Butthere were others who sat with compressed lips and brooding eyes as themen filed out of the dock. One of them, a little, dark-bearded,resolute fellow, put the thoughts of himself and comrades into words asthe ex-prisoners passed him.
"You damned murderers!" he said. "We'll fix you yet!"
Chapter 5
The Darkest Hour
If anything had been needed to give an impetus to Jack McMurdo'spopularity among his fellows it would have been his arrest andacquittal. That a man on the very night of joining the lodge shouldhave done something which brought him before the magistrate was a newrecord in the annals of the society. Already he had earned thereputation of a good boon companion, a cheery reveller, and withal aman of high temper, who would not take an insult even from theall-powerful Boss himself. But in addition to this he impressed hiscomrades with the idea that among them all there was not one whosebrain was so ready to devise a bloodthirsty scheme, or whose hand wouldbe more capable of carrying it out. "He'll be the boy for the cleanjob," said the oldsters to one another, and waited their time untilthey could set him to his work.
McGinty had instruments enough already; but he recognized that this wasa supremely able one. He felt like a man holding a fierce bloodhound inleash. There were curs to do the smaller work; but some day he wouldslip this creature upon its prey. A few members of the lodge, TedBaldwin among them, resented the rapid rise of the stranger and hatedhim for it; but they kept clear of him, for he was as ready to fight asto laugh.
But if he gained favour with his fellows, there was another quarter,one which had become even more vital to him, in which he lost it. EttieShafter's father would have nothing more to do with him, nor would heallow him to enter the house. Ettie herself was too deeply in love togive him up altogether, and yet her own good sense warned her of whatwould come from a marriage with a man who was regarded as a criminal.
One morning after a sleepless night she determined to see him, possiblyfor the last time, and make one strong endeavour to draw him from thoseevil influences which were sucking him down. She went to his house, ashe had often begged her to do, and made her way into the room which heused as his sitting-room. He was seated at a table, with his backturned and a letter in front of him. A sudden spirit of girlishmischief came over her--she was still only nineteen. He had not heardher when she pushed open the door. Now she tiptoed forward and laid herhand lightly upon his bended shoulders.
If she had expected to startle him, she certainly succeeded; but onlyin turn to be startled herself. With a tiger spring he turned on her,and his right hand was feeling for her throat. At the same instant withthe other hand he crumpled up the paper that lay before him. For aninstant he stood glaring. Then astonishment and joy took the place ofthe ferocity which had convulsed his features--a ferocity which hadsent her shrinking back in horror as from something which had neverbefore intruded into her gentle life.
"It's you!" said he, mopping his brow. "And to think that you shouldcome to me, heart of my heart, and I should find nothing better to dothan to want to strangle you! Come then, darling," and he held out hisarms, "let me make it up to you."
But she had not recovered from that sudden glimpse of guilty fear whichshe had read in the man's face. All her woman's instinct told her thatit was not the mere fright of a man who is startled. Guilt--that wasit--guilt and fear!
"What's come over you, Jack?" she cried. "Why were you so scared of me?Oh, Jack, if your conscience was at ease, you would not have looked atme like that!"
"Sure, I was thinking of other things, and when you came tripping solightly on those fairy feet of yours--"
"No, no, it was more than that, Jack." Then a sudden suspicion seizedher. "Let me see that letter you were writing."
"Ah, Ettie, I couldn't do that."
Her suspicions became certainties. "It's to another woman," she cried."I know it! Why else should you hold it from me? Was it to your wifethat you were writing? How am I to know that you are not a marriedman--you, a stranger, that nobody knows?"
"I am not married, Ettie. See now, I swear it! You're the only onewoman on earth to me. By the cross of Christ I swear it!"
He was so white with passionate earnestness that she could not butbelieve him.
"Well, then," she cried, "why will you not show me the letter?"
"I'll tell you, acushla," said he. "I'm under oath not to show it, andjust as I wouldn't break my word to you so I would keep it to those whohold my promise. It's the business of the lodge, and even to you it'ssecret. And if I was scared when a hand fell on me, can't youunderstand it when it might have been the hand of a detective?"
She felt that he was telling the truth. He gathered her into his armsand kissed away her fears and doubts.
"Sit here by me, then. It's a queer throne for such a queen; but it'sthe best your poor lover can find. He'll do better for you some ofthese days, I'm thinking. Now your mind is easy once again, is it not?"
"How can it ever be at ease, Jack, when I know that you are a criminalamong criminals, when I never know the day that I may hear you are incourt for murder? 'McMurdo the Scowrer,' that's what one of ourboarders called you yesterday. It went through my heart like a knife."
"Sure, hard words break no bones."
"But they were true."
"Well, dear, it's not so bad as you think. We are but poor men that aretrying in our own way to get our rights."
Ettie threw her arms round her lover's neck. "Give it up, Jack! For mysake, for God's sake, give it up! It was to ask you that I came hereto-day. Oh, Jack, see--I beg it of you on my bended knees! Kneelinghere before you I implore you to give it up!"
He raised her and soothed her with her head against his breast.
"Sure, my darlin', you don't know what it is you are asking. How couldI give it up when it would be to break my oath and to desert mycomrades? If you could see how things stand with me you could never askit of me. Besides, if I wanted to, how could I do it? You don't supposethat the lodge would let a man go free with all its secrets?"
"I've thought of that, Jack. I've planned it all. Father has saved somemoney. He is weary of this place where the fear of these people darkensour lives. He is ready to go. We would fly together to Philadelphia orNew York, where we would be safe from them."
McMurdo laughed. "The lodge has a long arm. Do you think it could notstretch from here to Philadelphia or New York?"
"Well, then, to the West, or to England, or to Germany, where fathercame from--anywhere to get away from this Valley of Fear!"
McMurdo thought of old Brother Morris. "Sure, it is the second time Ihave heard the valley so named," said he. "The shadow does indeed seemto lie heavy on some of you."
"It darkens every moment of our lives. Do you suppose that Ted Baldwinhas ever forgiven us? If it were not that he fears you, what do yousuppose our chances would be? If you saw the look in those dark, hungryeyes of his when they fall on me!"
"By Gar! I'd teach him better manners if I caught him at it! But seehere, little girl. I can't leave here. I can't--take that from me onceand for all. But if you will leave me to find my own way, I will try toprepare a way of getting honourably out of it."
"There is no honour in such a matter."
"Well, well, it's just how you look at it. But if you'll give me sixmonths, I'll work it so that I can leave without being ashamed to lookothers in the face."
The girl laughed with joy. "Six months!" she cried. "Is it a promise?"
"Well, it may be seven or eight. But within a year at the furthest wewill leave the valley behind us."
It was the most that Ettie could obtain, and yet it was something.There was this distant light to illuminate the gloom of the immediatefuture. She returned to her father's house more light-hearted than shehad ever been since Jack McMurdo had come into her life.
It might be thought that as a member, all the doings of the societywould be told to him; but he was soon to discover that the organizationwas wider and more complex than the simple lodge. Even Boss McGinty wasignorant as to many things; for there was an official named the CountyDelegate, living at Hobson's Patch farther down the line, who had powerover several different lodges which he wielded in a sudden andarbitrary way. Only once did McMurdo see him, a sly, little gray-hairedrat of a man, with a slinking g
ait and a sidelong glance which wascharged with malice. Evans Pott was his name, and even the great Bossof Vermissa felt towards him something of the repulsion and fear whichthe huge Danton may have felt for the puny but dangerous Robespierre.
One day Scanlan, who was McMurdo's fellow boarder, received a note fromMcGinty inclosing one from Evans Pott, which informed him that he wassending over two good men, Lawler and Andrews, who had instructions toact in the neighbourhood; though it was best for the cause that noparticulars as to their objects should be given. Would the Bodymastersee to it that suitable arrangements be made for their lodgings andcomfort until the time for action should arrive? McGinty added that itwas impossible for anyone to remain secret at the Union House, andthat, therefore, he would be obliged if McMurdo and Scanlan would putthe strangers up for a few days in their boarding house.
The same evening the two men arrived, each carrying his gripsack.Lawler was an elderly man, shrewd, silent, and self-contained, clad inan old black frock coat, which with his soft felt hat and ragged,grizzled beard gave him a general resemblance to an itinerant preacher.His companion Andrews was little more than a boy, frank-faced andcheerful, with the breezy manner of one who is out for a holiday andmeans to enjoy every minute of it. Both men were total abstainers, andbehaved in all ways as exemplary members of the society, with the onesimple exception that they were assassins who had often provedthemselves to be most capable instruments for this association ofmurder. Lawler had already carried out fourteen commissions of thekind, and Andrews three.
They were, as McMurdo found, quite ready to converse about their deedsin the past, which they recounted with the half-bashful pride of menwho had done good and unselfish service for the community. They werereticent, however, as to the immediate job in hand.
"They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink," Lawlerexplained. "They can count on us saying no more than we should. Youmust not take it amiss, but it is the orders of the County Delegatethat we obey."
"Sure, we are all in it together," said Scanlan, McMurdo's mate, as thefour sat together at supper.
"That's true enough, and we'll talk till the cows come home of thekilling of Charlie Williams or of Simon Bird, or any other job in thepast. But till the work is done we say nothing."
"There are half a dozen about here that I have a word to say to," saidMcMurdo, with an oath. "I suppose it isn't Jack Knox of Ironhill thatyou are after. I'd go some way to see him get his deserts."
"No, it's not him yet."
"Or Herman Strauss?"
"No, nor him either."
"Well, if you won't tell us we can't make you; but I'd be glad to know."
Lawler smiled and shook his head. He was not to be drawn.
In spite of the reticence of their guests, Scanlan and McMurdo werequite determined to be present at what they called "the fun." When,therefore, at an early hour one morning McMurdo heard them creepingdown the stairs he awakened Scanlan, and the two hurried on theirclothes. When they were dressed they found that the others had stolenout, leaving the door open behind them. It was not yet dawn, and by thelight of the lamps they could see the two men some distance down thestreet. They followed them warily, treading noiselessly in the deepsnow.
The boarding house was near the edge of the town, and soon they were atthe crossroads which is beyond its boundary. Here three men werewaiting, with whom Lawler and Andrews held a short, eager conversation.Then they all moved on together. It was clearly some notable job whichneeded numbers. At this point there are several trails which lead tovarious mines. The strangers took that which led to the Crow Hill, ahuge business which was in strong hands which had been able, thanks totheir energetic and fearless New England manager, Josiah H. Dunn, tokeep some order and discipline during the long reign of terror.
Day was breaking now, and a line of workmen were slowly making theirway, singly and in groups, along the blackened path.
McMurdo and Scanlan strolled on with the others, keeping in sight ofthe men whom they followed. A thick mist lay over them, and from theheart of it there came the sudden scream of a steam whistle. It was theten-minute signal before the cages descended and the day's labour began.
When they reached the open space round the mine shaft there were ahundred miners waiting, stamping their feet and blowing on theirfingers; for it was bitterly cold. The strangers stood in a littlegroup under the shadow of the engine house. Scanlan and McMurdo climbeda heap of slag from which the whole scene lay before them. They saw themine engineer, a great bearded Scotchman named Menzies, come out of theengine house and blow his whistle for the cages to be lowered.
At the same instant a tall, loose-framed young man with a clean-shaved,earnest face advanced eagerly towards the pit head. As he came forwardhis eyes fell upon the group, silent and motionless, under the enginehouse. The men had drawn down their hats and turned up their collars toscreen their faces. For a moment the presentiment of Death laid itscold hand upon the manager's heart. At the next he had shaken it offand saw only his duty towards intrusive strangers.
"Who are you?" he asked as he advanced. "What are you loitering therefor?"
There was no answer; but the lad Andrews stepped forward and shot himin the stomach. The hundred waiting miners stood as motionless andhelpless as if they were paralyzed. The manager clapped his two handsto the wound and doubled himself up. Then he staggered away; butanother of the assassins fired, and he went down sidewise, kicking andclawing among a heap of clinkers. Menzies, the Scotchman, gave a roarof rage at the sight and rushed with an iron spanner at the murderers;but was met by two balls in the face which dropped him dead at theirvery feet.
There was a surge forward of some of the miners, and an inarticulatecry of pity and of anger; but a couple of the strangers emptied theirsix-shooters over the heads of the crowd, and they broke and scattered,some of them rushing wildly back to their homes in Vermissa.
When a few of the bravest had rallied, and there was a return to themine, the murderous gang had vanished in the mists of morning, withouta single witness being able to swear to the identity of these men whoin front of a hundred spectators had wrought this double crime.
Scanlan and McMurdo made their way back; Scanlan somewhat subdued, forit was the first murder job that he had seen with his own eyes, and itappeared less funny than he had been led to believe. The horriblescreams of the dead manager's wife pursued them as they hurried to thetown. McMurdo was absorbed and silent; but he showed no sympathy forthe weakening of his companion.
"Sure, it is like a war," he repeated. "What is it but a war between usand them, and we hit back where we best can."
There was high revel in the lodge room at the Union House that night,not only over the killing of the manager and engineer of the Crow Hillmine, which would bring this organization into line with the otherblackmailed and terror-stricken companies of the district, but alsoover a distant triumph which had been wrought by the hands of the lodgeitself.
It would appear that when the County Delegate had sent over five goodmen to strike a blow in Vermissa, he had demanded that in return threeVermissa men should be secretly selected and sent across to killWilliam Hales of Stake Royal, one of the best known and most popularmine owners in the Gilmerton district, a man who was believed not tohave an enemy in the world; for he was in all ways a model employer. Hehad insisted, however, upon efficiency in the work, and had, therefore,paid off certain drunken and idle employees who were members of theall-powerful society. Coffin notices hung outside his door had notweakened his resolution, and so in a free, civilized country he foundhimself condemned to death.
The execution had now been duly carried out. Ted Baldwin, who sprawlednow in the seat of honour beside the Bodymaster, had been chief of theparty. His flushed face and glazed, blood-shot eyes told ofsleeplessness and drink. He and his two comrades had spent the nightbefore among the mountains. They were unkempt and weather-stained. Butno heroes, returning from a forlorn hope, could have had a warmerwelcome from their comrades.
The story was told and retold amid cries of delight and shouts oflaughter. They had waited for their man as he drove home at nightfall,taking their station at the top of a steep hill, where his horse mustbe at a walk. He was so furred to keep out the cold that he could notlay his hand on his pistol. They had pulled him out and shot him againand again. He had screamed for mercy. The screams were repeated for theamusement of the lodge.
"Let's hear again how he squealed," they cried.
None of them knew the man; but there is eternal drama in a killing, andthey had shown the Scowrers of Gilmerton that the Vermissa men were tobe relied upon.
There had been one contretemps; for a man and his wife had driven upwhile they were still emptying their revolvers into the silent body. Ithad been suggested that they should shoot them both; but they wereharmless folk who were not connected with the mines, so they weresternly bidden to drive on and keep silent, lest a worse thing befallthem. And so the blood-mottled figure had been left as a warning to allsuch hard-hearted employers, and the three noble avengers had hurriedoff into the mountains where unbroken nature comes down to the veryedge of the furnaces and the slag heaps. Here they were, safe andsound, their work well done, and the plaudits of their companions intheir ears.
It had been a great day for the Scowrers. The shadow had fallen evendarker over the valley. But as the wise general chooses the moment ofvictory in which to redouble his efforts, so that his foes may have notime to steady themselves after disaster, so Boss McGinty, looking outupon the scene of his operations with his brooding and malicious eyes,had devised a new attack upon those who opposed him. That very night,as the half-drunken company broke up, he touched McMurdo on the arm andled him aside into that inner room where they had their first interview.
"See here, my lad," said he, "I've got a job that's worthy of you atlast. You'll have the doing of it in your own hands."
"Proud I am to hear it," McMurdo answered.
"You can take two men with you--Manders and Reilly. They have beenwarned for service. We'll never be right in this district until ChesterWilcox has been settled, and you'll have the thanks of every lodge inthe coal fields if you can down him."
"I'll do my best, anyhow. Who is he, and where shall I find him?"
McGinty took his eternal half-chewed, half-smoked cigar from the cornerof his mouth, and proceeded to draw a rough diagram on a page torn fromhis notebook.
"He's the chief foreman of the Iron Dike Company. He's a hard citizen,an old colour sergeant of the war, all scars and grizzle. We've had twotries at him; but had no luck, and Jim Carnaway lost his life over it.Now it's for you to take it over. That's the house--all alone at theIron Dike crossroad, same as you see here on the map--without anotherwithin earshot. It's no good by day. He's armed and shoots quick andstraight, with no questions asked. But at night--well, there he is withhis wife, three children, and a hired help. You can't pick or choose.It's all or none. If you could get a bag of blasting powder at thefront door with a slow match to it--"
"What's the man done?"
"Didn't I tell you he shot Jim Carnaway?"
"Why did he shoot him?"
"What in thunder has that to do with you? Carnaway was about his houseat night, and he shot him. That's enough for me and you. You've got tosettle the thing right."
"There's these two women and the children. Do they go up too?"
"They have to--else how can we get him?"
"It seems hard on them; for they've done nothing."
"What sort of fool's talk is this? Do you back out?"
"Easy, Councillor, easy! What have I ever said or done that you shouldthink I would be after standing back from an order of the Bodymaster ofmy own lodge? If it's right or if it's wrong, it's for you to decide."
"You'll do it, then?"
"Of course I will do it."
"When?"
"Well, you had best give me a night or two that I may see the house andmake my plans. Then--"
"Very good," said McGinty, shaking him by the hand. "I leave it withyou. It will be a great day when you bring us the news. It's just thelast stroke that will bring them all to their knees."
McMurdo thought long and deeply over the commission which had been sosuddenly placed in his hands. The isolated house in which ChesterWilcox lived was about five miles off in an adjacent valley. That verynight he started off all alone to prepare for the attempt. It wasdaylight before he returned from his reconnaissance. Next day heinterviewed his two subordinates, Manders and Reilly, recklessyoungsters who were as elated as if it were a deer-hunt.
Two nights later they met outside the town, all three armed, and one ofthem carrying a sack stuffed with the powder which was used in thequarries. It was two in the morning before they came to the lonelyhouse. The night was a windy one, with broken clouds drifting swiftlyacross the face of a three-quarter moon. They had been warned to be ontheir guard against bloodhounds; so they moved forward cautiously, withtheir pistols cocked in their hands. But there was no sound save thehowling of the wind, and no movement but the swaying branches abovethem.
McMurdo listened at the door of the lonely house; but all was stillwithin. Then he leaned the powder bag against it, ripped a hole in itwith his knife, and attached the fuse. When it was well alight he andhis two companions took to their heels, and were some distance off,safe and snug in a sheltering ditch, before the shattering roar of theexplosion, with the low, deep rumble of the collapsing building, toldthem that their work was done. No cleaner job had ever been carried outin the bloodstained annals of the society.
But alas that work so well organized and boldly carried out should allhave gone for nothing! Warned by the fate of the various victims, andknowing that he was marked down for destruction, Chester Wilcox hadmoved himself and his family only the day before to some safer and lessknown quarters, where a guard of police should watch over them. It wasan empty house which had been torn down by the gunpowder, and the grimold colour sergeant of the war was still teaching discipline to theminers of Iron Dike.
"Leave him to me," said McMurdo. "He's my man, and I'll get him sure ifI have to wait a year for him."
A vote of thanks and confidence was passed in full lodge, and so forthe time the matter ended. When a few weeks later it was reported inthe papers that Wilcox had been shot at from an ambuscade, it was anopen secret that McMurdo was still at work upon his unfinished job.
Such were the methods of the Society of Freemen, and such were thedeeds of the Scowrers by which they spread their rule of fear over thegreat and rich district which was for so long a period haunted by theirterrible presence. Why should these pages be stained by further crimes?Have I not said enough to show the men and their methods?
These deeds are written in history, and there are records wherein onemay read the details of them. There one may learn of the shooting ofPolicemen Hunt and Evans because they had ventured to arrest twomembers of the society--a double outrage planned at the Vermissa lodgeand carried out in cold blood upon two helpless and disarmed men. Therealso one may read of the shooting of Mrs. Larbey when she was nursingher husband, who had been beaten almost to death by orders of BossMcGinty. The killing of the elder Jenkins, shortly followed by that ofhis brother, the mutilation of James Murdoch, the blowing up of theStaphouse family, and the murder of the Stendals all followed hard uponone another in the same terrible winter.
Darkly the shadow lay upon the Valley of Fear. The spring had come withrunning brooks and blossoming trees. There was hope for all Naturebound so long in an iron grip; but nowhere was there any hope for themen and women who lived under the yoke of the terror. Never had thecloud above them been so dark and hopeless as in the early summer ofthe year 1875.
Chapter 6
Danger
It was the height of the reign of terror. McMurdo, who had already beenappointed Inner Deacon, with every prospect of some day succeedingMcGinty as Bodymaster, was now so necessary to the councils of hiscomrades that nothing was done without his help and advice. The morepopular he became, however, with the Freemen, the blacker were thescowls which greeted him as he passed along the streets of Vermissa. Inspite of their terror the citizens were taking heart to band themselvestogether against their oppressors. Rumours had reached the lodge ofsecret gatherings in the Herald office and of distribution of firearmsamong the law-abiding people. But McGinty and his men were undisturbedby such reports. They were numerous, resolute, and well armed. Theiropponents were scattered and powerless. It would all end, as it haddone in the past, in aimless talk and possibly in impotent arrests. Sosaid McGinty, McMurdo, and all the bolder spirits.
It was a Saturday evening in May. Saturday was always the lodge night,and McMurdo was leaving his house to attend it when Morris, the weakerbrother of the order, came to see him. His brow was creased with care,and his kindly face was drawn and haggard.
"Can I speak with you freely, Mr. McMurdo?"
"Sure."
"I can't forget that I spoke my heart to you once, and that you kept itto yourself, even though the Boss himself came to ask you about it."
"What else could I do if you trusted me? It wasn't that I agreed withwhat you said."
"I know that well. But you are the one that I can speak to and be safe.I've a secret here," he put his hand to his breast, "and it is justburning the life out of me. I wish it had come to any one of you butme. If I tell it, it will mean murder, for sure. If I don't, it maybring the end of us all. God help me, but I am near out of my wits overit!"
McMurdo looked at the man earnestly. He was trembling in every limb. Hepoured some whisky into a glass and handed it to him. "That's thephysic for the likes of you," said he. "Now let me hear of it."
Morris drank, and his white face took a tinge of colour. "I can tell itto you all in one sentence," said he. "There's a detective on ourtrail."
McMurdo stared at him in astonishment. "Why, man, you're crazy," hesaid. "Isn't the place full of police and detectives and what harm didthey ever do us?"
"No, no, it's no man of the district. As you say, we know them, and itis little that they can do. But you've heard of Pinkerton's?"
"I've read of some folk of that name."
"Well, you can take it from me you've no show when they are on yourtrail. It's not a take-it-or-miss-it government concern. It's a deadearnest business proposition that's out for results and keeps out tillby hook or crook it gets them. If a Pinkerton man is deep in thisbusiness, we are all destroyed."
"We must kill him."
"Ah, it's the first thought that came to you! So it will be up at thelodge. Didn't I say to you that it would end in murder?"
"Sure, what is murder? Isn't it common enough in these parts?"
"It is, indeed; but it's not for me to point out the man that is to bemurdered. I'd never rest easy again. And yet it's our own necks thatmay be at stake. In God's name what shall I do?" He rocked to and froin his agony of indecision.
But his words had moved McMurdo deeply. It was easy to see that heshared the other's opinion as to the danger, and the need for meetingit. He gripped Morris's shoulder and shook him in his earnestness.
"See here, man," he cried, and he almost screeched the words in hisexcitement, "you won't gain anything by sitting keening like an oldwife at a wake. Let's have the facts. Who is the fellow? Where is he?How did you hear of him? Why did you come to me?"
"I came to you; for you are the one man that would advise me. I toldyou that I had a store in the East before I came here. I left goodfriends behind me, and one of them is in the telegraph service. Here'sa letter that I had from him yesterday. It's this part from the top ofthe page. You can read it yourself."
This was what McMurdo read:
How are the Scowrers getting on in your parts? We read    plenty of them in the papers. Between you and me I expect    to hear news from you before long. Five big corporations    and the two railroads have taken the thing up in dead    earnest. They mean it, and you can bet they'll get there!    They are right deep down into it. Pinkerton has taken hold    under their orders, and his best man, Birdy Edwards, is    operating. The thing has got to be stopped right now.
"Now read the postscript."
Of course, what I give you is what I learned in business;    so it goes no further. It's a queer cipher that you handle by    the yard every day and can get no meaning from.
McMurdo sat in silence for some time, with the letter in his listlesshands. The mist had lifted for a moment, and there was the abyss beforehim.
"Does anyone else know of this?" he asked.
"I have told no one else."
"But this man--your friend--has he any other person that he would belikely to write to?"
"Well, I dare say he knows one or two more."
"Of the lodge?"
"It's likely enough."
"I was asking because it is likely that he may have given somedescription of this fellow Birdy Edwards--then we could get on histrail."
"Well, it's possible. But I should not think he knew him. He is justtelling me the news that came to him by way of business. How would heknow this Pinkerton man?"
McMurdo gave a violent start.
"By Gar!" he cried, "I've got him. What a fool I was not to know it.Lord! but we're in luck! We will fix him before he can do any harm. Seehere, Morris, will you leave this thing in my hands?"
"Sure, if you will only take it off mine."
"I'll do that. You can stand right back and let me run it. Even yourname need not be mentioned. I'll take it all on myself, as if it wereto me that this letter has come. Will that content you?"
"It's just what I would ask."
"Then leave it at that and keep your head shut. Now I'll get down tothe lodge, and we'll soon make old man Pinkerton sorry for himself."
"You wouldn't kill this man?"
"The less you know, Friend Morris, the easier your conscience will be,and the better you will sleep. Ask no questions, and let these thingssettle themselves. I have hold of it now."
Morris shook his head sadly as he left. "I feel that his blood is on myhands," he groaned.
"Self-protection is no murder, anyhow," said McMurdo, smiling grimly."It's him or us. I guess this man would destroy us all if we left himlong in the valley. Why, Brother Morris, we'll have to elect youBodymaster yet; for you've surely saved the lodge."
And yet it was clear from his actions that he thought more seriously ofthis new intrusion than his words would show. It may have been hisguilty conscience, it may have been the reputation of the Pinkertonorganization, it may have been the knowledge that great, richcorporations had set themselves the task of clearing out the Scowrers;but, whatever his reason, his actions were those of a man who ispreparing for the worst. Every paper which would incriminate him wasdestroyed before he left the house. After that he gave a long sigh ofsatisfaction; for it seemed to him that he was safe. And yet the dangermust still have pressed somewhat upon him; for on his way to the lodgehe stopped at old man Shafter's. The house was forbidden him; but whenhe tapped at the window Ettie came out to him. The dancing Irishdeviltry had gone from her lover's eyes. She read his danger in hisearnest face.
"Something has happened!" she cried. "Oh, Jack, you are in danger!"
"Sure, it is not very bad, my sweetheart. And yet it may be wise thatwe make a move before it is worse."
"Make a move?"
"I promised you once that I would go some day. I think the time iscoming. I had news to-night, bad news, and I see trouble coming."
"The police?"
"Well, a Pinkerton. But, sure, you wouldn't know what that is, acushla,nor what it may mean to the likes of me. I'm too deep in this thing,and I may have to get out of it quick. You s
aid you would come with meif I went."
"Oh, Jack, it would be the saving of you!"
"I'm an honest man in some things, Ettie. I wouldn't hurt a hair ofyour bonny head for all that the world can give, nor ever pull you downone inch from the golden throne above the clouds where I always seeyou. Would you trust me?"
She put her hand in his without a word. "Well, then, listen to what Isay, and do as I order you, for indeed it's the only way for us. Thingsare going to happen in this valley. I feel it in my bones. There may bemany of us that will have to look out for ourselves. I'm one, anyhow.If I go, by day or night, it's you that must come with me!"
"I'd come after you, Jack."
"No, no, you shall come with me. If this valley is closed to me and Ican never come back, how can I leave you behind, and me perhaps inhiding from the police with never a chance of a message? It's with meyou must come. I know a good woman in the place I come from, and it'sthere I'd leave you till we can get married. Will you come?"
"Yes, Jack, I will come."
"God bless you for your trust in me! It's a fiend out of hell that Ishould be if I abused it. Now, mark you, Ettie, it will be just a wordto you, and when it reaches you, you will drop everything and comeright down to the waiting room at the depot and stay there till I comefor you."
"Day or night, I'll come at the word, Jack."
Somewhat eased in mind, now that his own preparations for escape hadbeen begun, McMurdo went on to the lodge. It had already assembled, andonly by complicated signs and counter-signs could he pass through theouter guard and inner guard who close-tiled it. A buzz of pleasure andwelcome greeted him as he entered. The long room was crowded, andthrough the haze of tobacco smoke he saw the tangled black mane of theBodymaster, the cruel, unfriendly features of Baldwin, the vulture faceof Harraway, the secretary, and a dozen more who were among the leadersof the lodge. He rejoiced that they should all be there to take counselover his news.
"Indeed, it's glad we are to see you, Brother!" cried the chairman."There's business here that wants a Solomon in judgment to set itright."
"It's Lander and Egan," explained his neighbour as he took his seat."They both claim the head money given by the lodge for the shooting ofold man Crabbe over at Stylestown, and who's to say which fired thebullet?"
McMurdo rose in his place and raised his hand. The expression of hisface froze the attention of the audience. There was a dead hush ofexpectation.
"Eminent Bodymaster," he said, in a solemn voice, "I claim urgency!"
"Brother McMurdo claims urgency," said McGinty. "It's a claim that bythe rules of this lodge takes precedence. Now Brother, we attend you."
McMurdo took the letter from his pocket.
"Eminent Bodymaster and Brethren," he said, "I am the bearer of illnews this day; but it is better that it should be known and discussed,than that a blow should fall upon us without warning which woulddestroy us all. I have information that the most powerful and richestorganizations in this state have bound themselves together for ourdestruction, and that at this very moment there is a Pinkertondetective, one Birdy Edwards, at work in the valley collecting theevidence which may put a rope round the necks of many of us, and sendevery man in this room into a felon's cell. That is the situation forthe discussion of which I have made a claim of urgency."
There was a dead silence in the room. It was broken by the chairman.
"What is your evidence for this, Brother McMurdo?" he asked.
"It is in this letter which has come into my hands," said McMurdo. Meread the passage aloud. "It is a matter of honour with me that I cangive no further particulars about the letter, nor put it into yourhands; but I assure you that there is nothing else in it which canaffect the interests of the lodge. I put the case before you as it hasreached me."
"Let me say, Mr. Chairman," said one of the older brethren, "that Ihave heard of Birdy Edwards, and that he has the name of being the bestman in the Pinkerton service."
"Does anyone know him by sight?" asked McGinty.
"Yes," said McMurdo, "I do."
There was a murmur of astonishment through the hall.
"I believe we hold him in the hollow of our hands," he continued withan exulting smile upon his face. "If we act quickly and wisely, we cancut this thing short. If I have your confidence and your help, it islittle that we have to fear."
"What have we to fear, anyhow? What can he know of our affairs?"
"You might say so if all were as stanch as you, Councillor. But thisman has all the millions of the capitalists at his back. Do you thinkthere is no weaker brother among all our lodges that could not bebought? He will get at our secrets--maybe has got them already. There'sonly one sure cure."
"That he never leaves the valley," said Baldwin.
McMurdo nodded. "Good for you, Brother Baldwin," he said. "You and Ihave had our differences, but you have said the true word to-night."
"Where is he, then? Where shall we know him?"
"Eminent Bodymaster," said McMurdo, earnestly, "I would put it to youthat this is too vital a thing for us to discuss in open lodge. Godforbid that I should throw a doubt on anyone here; but if so much as aword of gossip got to the ears of this man, there would be an end ofany chance of our getting him. I would ask the lodge to choose a trustycommittee, Mr. Chairman--yourself, if I might suggest it, and BrotherBaldwin here, and five more. Then I can talk freely of what I know andof what I advise should be done."
The proposition was at once adopted, and the committee chosen. Besidesthe chairman and Baldwin there were the vulture-faced secretary,Harraway, Tiger Cormac, the brutal young assassin, Carter, thetreasurer, and the brothers Willaby, fearless and desperate men whowould stick at nothing.
The usual revelry of the lodge was short and subdued: for there was acloud upon the men's spirits, and many there for the first time beganto see the cloud of avenging Law drifting up in that serene sky underwhich they had dwelt so long. The horrors they had dealt out to othershad been so much a part of their settled lives that the thought ofretribution had become a remote one, and so seemed the more startlingnow that it came so closely upon them. They broke up early and lefttheir leaders to their council.
"Now, McMurdo!" said McGinty when they were alone. The seven men satfrozen in their seats.
"I said just now that I knew Birdy Edwards," McMurdo explained. "I neednot tell you that he is not here under that name. He's a brave man, butnot a crazy one. He passes under the name of Steve Wilson, and he islodging at Hobson's Patch."
"How do you know this?"
"Because I fell into talk with him. I thought little of it at the time,nor would have given it a second thought but for this letter; but nowI'm sure it's the man. I met him on the cars when I went down the lineon Wednesday--a hard case if ever there was one. He said he was areporter. I believed it for the moment. Wanted to know all he couldabout the Scowrers and what he called 'the outrages' for a New Yorkpaper. Asked me every kind of question so as to get something. You betI was giving nothing away. 'I'd pay for it and pay well,' said he, 'ifI could get some stuff that would suit my editor.' I said what Ithought would please him best, and he handed me a twenty-dollar billfor my information. 'There's ten times that for you,' said he, 'if youcan find me all that I want.'"
"What did you tell him, then?"
"Any stuff I could make up."
"How do you know he wasn't a newspaper man?"
"I'll tell you. He got out at Hobson's Patch, and so did I. I chancedinto the telegraph bureau, and he was leaving it.
"'See here,' said the operator after he'd gone out, 'I guess we shouldcharge double rates for this.'--'I guess you should,' said I. He hadfilled the form with stuff that might have been Chinese, for all wecould make of it. 'He fires a sheet of this off every day,' said theclerk. 'Yes,' said I; 'it's special news for his paper, and he's scaredthat the others should tap it.' That was what the operator thought andwhat I thought at the time; but I think differently now."
"By Gar! I believe you are
right," said McGinty. "But what do you allowthat we should do about it?"
"Why not go right down now and fix him?" someone suggested.
"Ay, the sooner the better."
"I'd start this next minute if I knew where we could find him," saidMcMurdo. "He's in Hobson's Patch; but I don't know the house. I've gota plan, though, if you'll only take my advice."
"Well, what is it?"
"I'll go to the Patch to-morrow morning. I'll find him through theoperator. He can locate him, I guess. Well, then I'll tell him that I'ma Freeman myself. I'll offer him all the secrets of the lodge for aprice. You bet he'll tumble to it. I'll tell him the papers are at myhouse, and that it's as much as my life would be worth to let him comewhile folk were about. He'll see that that's horse sense. Let him comeat ten o'clock at night, and he shall see everything. That will fetchhim sure."
"Well?"
"You can plan the rest for yourselves. Widow MacNamara's is a lonelyhouse. She's as true as steel and as deaf as a post. There's onlyScanlan and me in the house. If I get his promise--and I'll let youknow if I do--I'd have the whole seven of you come to me by nineo'clock. We'll get him in. If ever he gets out alive--well, he can talkof Birdy Edwards's luck for the rest of his days!"
"There's going to be a vacancy at Pinkerton's or I'm mistaken. Leave itat that, McMurdo. At nine to-morrow we'll be with you. You once get thedoor shut behind him, and you can leave the rest with us."
Chapter 7
The Trapping of Birdy Edwards
As McMurdo had said, the house in which he lived was a lonely one andvery well suited for such a crime as they had planned. It was on theextreme fringe of the town and stood well back from the road. In anyother case the conspirators would have simply called out their man, asthey had many a time before, and emptied their pistols into his body;but in this instance it was very necessary to find out how much heknew, how he knew it, and what had been passed on to his employers.
It was possible that they were already too late and that the work hadbeen done. If that was indeed so, they could at least have theirrevenge upon the man who had done it. But they were hopeful thatnothing of great importance had yet come to the detective's knowledge,as otherwise, they argued, he would not have troubled to write down andforward such trivial information as McMurdo claimed to have given him.However, all this they would learn from his own lips. Once in theirpower, they would find a way to make him speak. It was not the firsttime that they had handled an unwilling witness.
McMurdo went to Hobson's Patch as agreed. The police seemed to takeparticular interest in him that morning, and Captain Marvin--he who hadclaimed the old acquaintance with him at Chicago--actually addressedhim as he waited at the station. McMurdo turned away and refused tospeak with him. He was back from his mission in the afternoon, and sawMcGinty at the Union House.
"He is coming," he said.
"Good!" said McGinty. The giant was in his shirt sleeves, with chainsand seals gleaming athwart his ample waistcoat and a diamond twinklingthrough the fringe of his bristling beard. Drink and politics had madethe Boss a very rich as well as powerful man. The more terrible,therefore, seemed that glimpse of the prison or the gallows which hadrisen before him the night before.
"Do you reckon he knows much?" he asked anxiously.
McMurdo shook his head gloomily. "He's been here some time--six weeksat the least. I guess he didn't come into these parts to look at theprospect. If he has been working among us all that time with therailroad money at his back, I should expect that he has got results,and that he has passed them on."
"There's not a weak man in the lodge," cried McGinty. "True as steel,every man of them. And yet, by the Lord! there is that skunk Morris.What about him? If any man gives us away, it would be he. I've a mindto send a couple of the boys round before evening to give him a beatingup and see what they can get from him."
"Well, there would be no harm in that," McMurdo answered. "I won't denythat I have a liking for Morris and would be sorry to see him come toharm. He has spoken to me once or twice over lodge matters, and thoughhe may not see them the same as you or I, he never seemed the sort thatsqueals. But still it is not for me to stand between him and you."
"I'll fix the old devil!" said McGinty with an oath. "I've had my eyeon him this year past."
"Well, you know best about that," McMurdo answered. "But whatever youdo must be to-morrow; for we must lie low until the Pinkerton affair issettled up. We can't afford to set the police buzzing, to-day of alldays."
"True for you," said McGinty. "And we'll learn from Birdy Edwardshimself where he got his news if we have to cut his heart out first.Did he seem to scent a trap?"
McMurdo laughed. "I guess I took him on his weak point," he said. "Ifhe could get on a good trail of the Scowrers, he's ready to follow itinto hell. I took his money," McMurdo grinned as he produced a wad ofdollar notes, "and as much more when he has seen all my papers."
"What papers?"
"Well, there are no papers. But I filled him up about constitutions andbooks of rules and forms of membership. He expects to get right down tothe end of everything before he leaves."
"Faith, he's right there," said McGinty grimly. "Didn't he ask you whyyou didn't bring him the papers?"
"As if I would carry such things, and me a suspected man, and CaptainMarvin after speaking to me this very day at the depot!"
"Ay, I heard of that," said McGinty. "I guess the heavy end of thisbusiness is coming on to you. We could put him down an old shaft whenwe've done with him; but however we work it we can't get past the manliving at Hobson's Patch and you being there to-day."
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "If we handle it right, they can neverprove the killing," said he. "No one can see him come to the houseafter dark, and I'll lay to it that no one will see him go. Now seehere, Councillor, I'll show you my plan and I'll ask you to fit theothers into it. You will all come in good time. Very well. He comes atten. He is to tap three times, and me to open the door for him. ThenI'll get behind him and shut it. He's our man then."
"That's all easy and plain."
"Yes; but the next step wants considering. He's a hard proposition.He's heavily armed. I've fooled him proper, and yet he is likely to beon his guard. Suppose I show him right into a room with seven men in itwhere he expected to find me alone. There is going to be shooting, andsomebody is going to be hurt."
"That's so."
"And the noise is going to bring every damned copper in the township ontop of it."
"I guess you are right."
"This is how I should work it. You will all be in the big room--same asyou saw when you had a chat with me. I'll open the door for him, showhim into the parlour beside the door, and leave him there while I getthe papers. That will give me the chance of telling you how things areshaping. Then I will go back to him with some faked papers. As he isreading them I will jump for him and get my grip on his pistol arm.You'll hear me call and in you will rush. The quicker the better; forhe is as strong a man as I, and I may have more than I can manage. ButI allow that I can hold him till you come."
"It's a good plan," said McGinty. "The lodge will owe you a debt forthis. I guess when I move out of the chair I can put a name to the manthat's coming after me."
"Sure, Councillor, I am little more than a recruit," said McMurdo; buthis face showed what he thought of the great man's compliment.
When he had returned home he made his own preparations for the grimevening in front of him. First he cleaned, oiled, and loaded his Smith& Wesson revolver. Then he surveyed the room in which the detective wasto be trapped. It was a large apartment, with a long deal table in thecentre, and the big stove at one side. At each of the other sides werewindows. There were no shutters on these: only light curtains whichdrew across. McMurdo examined these attentively. No doubt it must havestruck him that the apartment was very exposed for so secret a meeting.Yet its distance from the road made it of less consequence. Finally hediscussed the matter with his fellow lodger. Scanlan, though a Scowrer,was an inoffensive little man who was too weak to stand against theopinion of his comrades, but was secretly horrified by the deeds ofblood at which he had sometimes been forced to assist. McMurdo told himshortly what was intended.
"And if I were you, Mike Scanlan, I would take a night off and keepclear of it. There will be bloody work here before morning."
"Well, indeed then, Mac," Scanlan answered. "It's not the will but thenerve that is wanting in me. When I saw Manager Dunn go down at thecolliery yonder it was just more than I could stand. I'm not made forit, same as you or McGinty. If the lodge will think none the worse ofme, I'll just do as you advise and leave you to yourselves for theevening."
The men came in good time as arranged. They were outwardly respectablecitizens, well clad and cleanly; but a judge of faces would have readlittle hope for Birdy Edwards in those hard mouths and remorselesseyes. There was not a man in the room whose hands had not been reddeneda dozen times before. They were as hardened to human murder as abutcher to sheep.
Foremost, of course, both in appearance and in guilt, was theformidable Boss. Harraway, the secretary, was a lean, bitter man with along, scraggy neck and nervous, jerky limbs, a man of incorruptiblefidelity where the finances of the order were concerned, and with nonotion of justice or honesty to anyone beyond. The treasurer, Carter,was a middle-aged man, with an impassive, rather sulky expression, anda yellow parchment skin. He was a cap
able organizer, and the actualdetails of nearly every outrage had sprung from his plotting brain. Thetwo Willabys were men of action, tall, lithe young fellows withdetermined faces, while their companion, Tiger Cormac, a heavy, darkyouth, was feared even by his own comrades for the ferocity of hisdisposition. These were the men who assembled that night under the roofof McMurdo for the killing of the Pinkerton detective.
Their host had placed whisky upon the table, and they had hastened toprime themselves for the work before them. Baldwin and Cormac werealready half-drunk, and the liquor had brought out all their ferocity.Cormac placed his hands on the stove for an instant--it had beenlighted, for the nights were still cold.
"That will do," said he, with an oath.
"Ay," said Baldwin, catching his meaning. "If he is strapped to that,we will have the truth out of him."
"We'll have the truth out of him, never fear," said McMurdo. He hadnerves of steel, this man; for though the whole weight of the affairwas on him his manner was as cool and unconcerned as ever. The othersmarked it and applauded.
"You are the one to handle him," said the Boss approvingly. "Not awarning will he get till your hand is on his throat. It's a pity thereare no shutters to your windows."
McMurdo went from one to the other and drew the curtains tighter. "Sureno one can spy upon us now. It's close upon the hour."
"Maybe he won't come. Maybe he'll get a sniff of danger," said thesecretary.
"He'll come, never fear," McMurdo answered. "He is as eager to come asyou can be to see him. Hark to that!"
They all sat like wax figures, some with their glasses arrested halfwayto their lips. Three loud knocks had sounded at the door.
"Hush!" McMurdo raised his hand in caution. An exulting glance wentround the circle, and hands were laid upon hidden weapons.
"Not a sound, for your lives!" McMurdo whispered, as he went from theroom, closing the door carefully behind him.
With strained ears the murderers waited. They counted the steps oftheir comrade down the passage. Then they heard him open the outerdoor. There were a few words as of greeting. Then they were aware of astrange step inside and of an unfamiliar voice. An instant later camethe slam of the door and the turning of the key in the lock. Their preywas safe within the trap. Tiger Cormac laughed horribly, and BossMcGinty clapped his great hand across his mouth.
"Be quiet, you fool!" he whispered. "You'll be the undoing of us yet!"
There was a mutter of conversation from the next room. It seemedinterminable. Then the door opened, and McMurdo appeared, his fingerupon his lip.
He came to the end of the table and looked round at them. A subtlechange had come over him. His manner was as of one who has great workto do. His face had set into granite firmness. His eyes shone with afierce excitement behind his spectacles. He had become a visible leaderof men. They stared at him with eager interest; but he said nothing.Still with the same singular gaze he looked from man to man.
"Well!" cried Boss McGinty at last. "Is he here? Is Birdy Edwards here?"
"Yes," McMurdo answered slowly. "Birdy Edwards is here. I am BirdyEdwards!"
There were ten seconds after that brief speech during which the roommight have been empty, so profound was the silence. The hissing of akettle upon the stove rose sharp and strident to the ear. Seven whitefaces, all turned upward to this man who dominated them, were setmotionless with utter terror. Then, with a sudden shivering of glass, abristle of glistening rifle barrels broke through each window, whilethe curtains were torn from their hangings.
At the sight Boss McGinty gave the roar of a wounded bear and plungedfor the half-opened door. A levelled revolver met him there with thestern blue eyes of Captain Marvin of the Mine Police gleaming behindthe sights. The Boss recoiled and fell back into his chair.
"You're safer there, Councillor," said the man whom they had known asMcMurdo. "And you, Baldwin, if you don't take your hand off yourpistol, you'll cheat the hangman yet. Pull it out, or by the Lord thatmade me--There, that will do. There are forty armed men round thishouse, and you can figure it out for yourself what chance you have.Take their pistols, Marvin!"
There was no possible resistance under the menace of those rifles. Themen were disarmed. Sulky, sheepish, and amazed, they still sat roundthe table.
"I'd like to say a word to you before we separate," said the man whohad trapped them. "I guess we may not meet again until you see me onthe stand in the courthouse. I'll give you something to think overbetween now and then. You know me now for what I am. At last I can putmy cards on the table. I am Birdy Edwards of Pinkerton's. I was chosento break up your gang. I had a hard and dangerous game to play. Not asoul, not one soul, not my nearest and dearest, knew that I was playingit. Only Captain Marvin here and my employers knew that. But it's overto-night, thank God, and I am the winner!"
The seven pale, rigid faces looked up at him. There was unappeasablehatred in their eyes. He read the relentless threat.
"Maybe you think that the game is not over yet. Well, I take my chanceof that. Anyhow, some of you will take no further hand, and there aresixty more besides yourselves that will see a jail this night. I'lltell you this, that when I was put upon this job I never believed therewas such a society as yours. I thought it was paper talk, and that Iwould prove it so. They told me it was to do with the Freemen; so Iwent to Chicago and was made one. Then I was surer than ever that itwas just paper talk; for I found no harm in the society, but a deal ofgood.
"Still, I had to carry out my job, and I came to the coal valleys. WhenI reached this place I learned that I was wrong and that it wasn't adime novel after all. So I stayed to look after it. I never killed aman in Chicago. I never minted a dollar in my life. Those I gave youwere as good as any others; but I never spent money better. But I knewthe way into your good wishes and so I pretended to you that the lawwas after me. It all worked just as I thought.
"So I joined your infernal lodge, and I took my share in your councils.Maybe they will say that I was as bad as you. They can say what theylike, so long as I get you. But what is the truth? The night I joinedyou beat up old man Stanger. I could not warn him, for there was notime; but I held your hand, Baldwin, when you would have killed him. Ifever I have suggested things, so as to keep my place among you, theywere things which I knew I could prevent. I could not save Dunn andMenzies, for I did not know enough; but I will see that their murderersare hanged. I gave Chester Wilcox warning, so that when I blew hishouse in he and his folk were in hiding. There was many a crime that Icould not stop; but if you look back and think how often your man camehome the other road, or was down in town when you went for him, orstayed indoors when you thought he would come out, you'll see my work."
"You blasted traitor!" hissed McGinty through his closed teeth.
"Ay, John McGinty, you may call me that if it eases your smart. You andyour like have been the enemy of God and man in these parts. It took aman to get between you and the poor devils of men and women that youheld under your grip. There was just one way of doing it, and I did it.You call me a traitor; but I guess there's many a thousand will call mea deliverer that went down into hell to save them. I've had threemonths of it. I wouldn't have three such months again if they let meloose in the treasury at Washington for it. I had to stay till I had itall, every man and every secret right here in this hand. I'd havewaited a little longer if it hadn't come to my knowledge that my secretwas coming out. A letter had come into the town that would have set youwise to it all. Then I had to act and act quickly.
"I've nothing more to say to you, except that when my time comes I'lldie the easier when I think of the work I have done in this valley.Now, Marvin, I'll keep you no more. Take them in and get it over."
There is little more to tell. Scanlan had been given a sealed note tobe left at the address of Miss Ettie Shafter, a mission which he hadaccepted with a wink and a knowing smile. In the early hours of themorning a beautiful woman and a much muffled man boarded a specialtrain which had been sent by the railr
oad company, and made a swift,unbroken journey out of the land of danger. It was the last time thatever either Ettie or her lover set foot in the Valley of Fear. Ten dayslater they were married in Chicago, with old Jacob Shafter as witnessof the wedding.
The trial of the Scowrers was held far from the place where theiradherents might have terrified the guardians of the law. In vain theystruggled. In vain the money of the lodge--money squeezed by blackmailout of the whole countryside--was spent like water in the attempt tosave them. That cold, clear, unimpassioned statement from one who knewevery detail of their lives, their organization, and their crimes wasunshaken by all the wiles of their defenders. At last after so manyyears they were broken and scattered. The cloud was lifted forever fromthe valley.
McGinty met his fate upon the scaffold, cringing and whining when thelast hour came. Eight of his chief followers shared his fate. Fifty-oddhad various degrees of imprisonment. The work of Birdy Edwards wascomplete.
And yet, as he had guessed, the game was not over yet. There wasanother hand to be played, and yet another and another. Ted Baldwin,for one, had escaped the scaffold; so had the Willabys; so had severalothers of the fiercest spirits of the gang. For ten years they were outof the world, and then came a day when they were free once more--a daywhich Edwards, who knew his men, was very sure would be an end of hislife of peace. They had sworn an oath on all that they thought holy tohave his blood as a vengeance for their comrades. And well they stroveto keep their vow!
From Chicago he was chased, after two attempts so near success that itwas sure that the third would get him. From Chicago he went under achanged name to California, and it was there that the light went for atime out of his life when Ettie Edwards died. Once again he was nearlykilled, and once again under the name of Douglas he worked in a lonelycanyon, where with an English partner named Barker he amassed afortune. At last there came a warning to him that the bloodhounds wereon his track once more, and he cleared--only just in time--for England.And thence came the John Douglas who for a second time married a worthymate, and lived for five years as a Sussex county gentleman, a lifewhich ended with the strange happenings of which we have heard.
Epilogue
The police trial had passed, in which the case of John Douglas wasreferred to a higher court. So had the Quarter Sessions, at which hewas acquitted as having acted in self-defense.
"Get him out of England at any cost," wrote Holmes to the wife. "Thereare forces here which may be more dangerous than those he has escaped.There is no safety for your husband in England."
Two months had gone by, and the case had to some extent passed from ourminds. Then one morning there came an enigmatic note slipped into ourletter box. "Dear me, Mr. Holmes. Dear me!" said this singular epistle.There was neither superscription nor signature. I laughed at the quaintmessage; but Holmes showed unwonted seriousness.
"Deviltry, Watson!" he remarked, and sat long with a clouded brow.
Late last night Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, brought up a message that agentleman wished to see Holmes, and that the matter was of the utmostimportance. Close at the heels of his messenger came Cecil Barker, ourfriend of the moated Manor House. His face was drawn and haggard.
"I've had bad news--terrible news, Mr. Holmes," said he.
"I feared as much," said Holmes.
"You have not had a cable, have you?"
"I have had a note from someone who has."
"It's poor Douglas. They tell me his name is Edwards; but he willalways be Jack Douglas of Benito Canyon to me. I told you that theystarted together for South Africa in the Palmyra three weeks ago."
"Exactly."
"The ship reached Cape Town last night. I received this cable from MrsDouglas this morning:--
"Jack has been lost overboard in gale off St Helena. No one knows howaccident occurred.--Ivy Douglas."
"Ha! It came like that, did it?" said Holmes, thoughtfully. "Well, I'veno doubt it was well stage-managed."
"You mean that you think there was no accident?"
"None in the world."
"He was murdered?"
"Surely!"
"So I think also. These infernal Scowrers, this cursed vindictive nestof criminals--"
"No, no, my good sir," said Holmes. "There is a master hand here. It isno case of sawed-off shot-guns and clumsy six-shooters. You can tell anold master by the sweep of his brush. I can tell a Moriarty when I seeone. This crime is from London, not from America."
"But for what motive?"
"Because it is done by a man who cannot afford to fail--one whose wholeunique position depends upon the fact that all he does must succeed. Agreat brain and a huge organization have been turned to the extinctionof one man. It is crushing the nut with the hammer--an absurdextravagance of energy--but the nut is very effectually crushed all thesame."
"How came this man to have anything to do with it?"
"I can only say that the first word that ever came to us of thebusiness was from one of his lieutenants. These Americans were welladvised. Having an English job to do, they took into partnership, asany foreign criminal could do, this great consultant in crime. Fromthat moment their man was doomed. At first he would content himself byusing his machinery in order to find their victim. Then he wouldindicate how the matter might be treated. Finally, when he read in thereports of the failure of this agent, he would step in himself with amaster touch. You heard me warn this man at Birlstone Manor House thatthe coming danger was greater than the past. Was I right?"
Barker beat his head with his clenched fist in his impotent anger.
"Do you tell me that we have to sit down under this? Do you say that noone can ever get level with this king-devil?"
"No, I don't say that," said Holmes, and his eyes seemed to be lookingfar into the future. "I don't say that he can't be beat. But you mustgive me time--you must give me time!"
We all sat in silence for some minutes, while those fateful eyes stillstrained to pierce the veil.
